Hello again everyone. Uh thank you again for being with us uh in this improving flow stream of uh the hacker conference. Um we now move on to what sounds like a a a very intriguing presentation on actionable insights to to reduce delayed discharge in in day surgery. um and the role that link data and and clinical and analytical uh collaborations can can have in that. This will be presented by uh Nora who's a senior information analyst uh statistician uh and joins us I believe from uh north of the the border at NHS Lovian in uh Scotland. Um so uh this is the first of our insight sessions which are slightly longer at 25 minutes. Um again there will be some chance for for Q&amp;A at the end. So please use the the Q&amp;A function to ask any questions. Uh I'll now hand over to to Nora for the presentation. &gt;&gt; Thanks for a great introduction James and pleased to be here. Um yeah so I work in Scotland. I work in a clinical health board. I'm an in-house analyst. So we work it's quite nice to be able to work directly with uh frontline staff. So today, well, first of all, I'll start by my slides. Oh, there we go. Um, I'll start with a disclaimer, which is I'm going to be speaking a lot about delayed discharges. This is not the usual delayed discharge definition in the broad uh health care system. I'll be focusing on an operational definition for the day surgery unit which means patients that were not discharged on the same day as their procedure because as day surgery unit suggests they are expected to be discharged that same day. So with today's talk I have three aims. I want to demonstrate to you the power of analyzing linked data to achieve strategic objectives from a health board by linking all these massive amounts of health records from various different sources that are listed there. also uh provide some understanding on the predictors of delay discharges for day surgery unit patients and finally use these data insights to produce impactful operational changes that improve quality. So a bit of the context of this piece of work we collaborated with uh anestheticists from the Royal Infirmary and hospital managers as well and I was the analytical lead from the analytical side of the team. So it was hospital and analyst collaboration. They had a target which is that 95% of the day surgery patients are supposed to be same day discharges which is quite ambitious and above the British Association for Day Surgery standards and they came to us with a problem. They wanted to measure their their DSU performance and they also wanted to understand what factors contribute to delay discharges using a wealth of linked data so that they could leverage that data to achieve their target and finally we provided them with bespoke analysis and then a future plan to evaluate the changes that we made. Um so when we looked at their performance their goal is 5% of delayed discharges but their performance is actually 30% of the patients nearly one in three is a delayed discharge. These varies obviously over time. Okay. So the questions we wanted to address was what factors contribute to these delay discharges and how big is their contribution? So looking at significance, direction and magnitude of the effect right? Is it a positive effect or a negative one and how big is it? The way we went about addressing this is using logistic regressions. So generalized linear mix models where delay discharge was a response variable and we put in a bunch of predictors that the clinicians thought might play a part or wanted to test. And these could be grouped in four categories. those related to patient health, demography, service related predictors or medical practice related ones. All of these was done using reproducible analytical pipelines. So code is up for sharing. So I'll hone a bit more into the model. So we had a sample size of 6,000 patients and as I said the response variable was delayed discharge, yes or no. And then I'm going to tell you all the things that went into these four categories. So in terms of demography, age, sex, deprivation, the Scottish index of multiple deprivation, whether they had a next of kin, all of these in red are patient our patient health related uh characteristics because the one of the working hypothesis of the clinicians was that maybe their performance was getting worse because they were getting more ill patients or patients with poorer health. So we were we analyzed loads of these things including frailty which is a very interesting electronic frailty index which is something that I don't know if in England but in Scotland we do have and it's I have to expand more on that in questions but it's a continuous variable that picks up fraalty markers. Um and then service related factors were the surgeon identity, the specialty, the temporal factors, the time of the operation and things like that. And finally medical practice, the type of anesthesia, the type of procedure and then we ran three specific models looking at the total amount of opioids a patient received, the amount of every specific opioid that they received and how that affected delay discharges and also antiimetics which are anti-nausea medicines. So in terms of the results all the significant factors are the only ones that are not scratched. So we did not use model reduction and from here you can see that we don't have any evidence that patient health related conditions have an effect on delay discharges. All the red things have been scratched off. And finally we had the same consistent pattern for all the three medical practice models that we ran. Now I'm going to show you the the size of the effect of those significant factors. I'm going to show you an odds ratio plot. Everything to the right of the odds ratio plot in red is going to increase has a negative effect increasing delay discharge chances. Everything in blue reduces the chances of being a delayed discharge. So here you have all of the significant factors. And what is really striking is that everything except the things that I highlighted in yellow are things that can be known in advance. The only things that are not not known in advance is the p the pain and the nausea that the patient reports in s in recovery. So basically this debunks the working hypothesis that the medics had which is no health related uh conditions are not playing a significant effect in delayed discharges. And the good news is most of the things that contribute to that can be known in advance. So using that we co-designed four actionable insights related to changing operational metrics, improving prescribing practices, safeguarding our efficiency gains and evaluating prescribing consistency. I'll go through each of them and the the evidence that gave rise to them and the actionable insight concretely. So in terms of changing operational metrics, we found that the type of procedure that patient went for really mattered. So here is again another odds ratio plot with a different types of procedures on the y axis. And then you can really see that patients that went for a thyroid surgery were 117 times more likely to be a delayed discharge. When we try and produce our best estimate of the probability of patients being a delayed discharge depending on the type of procedure we see that if you're thyroid again nearly 100% delay discharge right so what did we do with this information well in collaboration with the clinicians and the hospital managers we decided to remove thyroid patients from the KPIs because we realized that the bottom line was that why were they not being discharged on the same day. Well, it turns out it was medical decisions with solid uh ground. So, they were not going to change those medical decisions. So, then if you're not going to change those medical decisions and you have good reasons for that medical practice, then remove it from your KPIs so that you can have more realistic metrics and they can still come through the DSU for structural booking reasons, but they will not longer inflate artificially your metrics. Now the second insight was to not prescribing practices and before I get into that I need to tell you the why the rational and a we concept. So the rationale why did we look at prescribing practices because opioids that patients receive for pain relief caused each and nausea that reduces appetite and eating is one of the criteria for discharging patients. If you have nausea then they prescribe you antiimetics so to reduce drugs to reduce your nausea. So that's why we looked at these ones. And then what is an equidosese? This is just an equivalence factor that enables us to compare drugs with different strengths on the same scale because for example fentanil is much stronger than morphine and so by using equidosis we can compare drugs with different strengths. Right? So this is a result from our opioid specific models. On the left hand side plot you have the different opioids and their odds ratio. So their effect on uh delay discharges and you can see that they vary greatly. Right? So first of all you can see that fentinil is the only one that completely overlaps with one. So it does not have a significant effect in increasing delay discharges. Brilliant news. Then the second thing you have on the other plot is the frequency which with which they are uh prescribed to patients and you can see that dehydrocodine which is nearly triples a patient's chance of being a delayed discharge is a most often prescribed opioid. So opioids with the smallest impacts are not often not the most often prescribed. That was a serious problem. So what did we do with this information? Well, we changed that. Uh so why were they being prescribed more often? It's because they were at the top of the hospital prescribing protocol drop-down menu. We know clinicians are pressured for time. They are super busy. They're doing their best. They are short on time. And so they if they have no specific preference, they will just go for the top option on the drop- down menu. So instead of having a drop-own menu that has them ordered alphabetically or for any random reason, we change the order. So those with the smallest effects are at the top. A small change that we hope will bring a massive improvement. Then the third one is evaluating opiate consistency. So this means consistency between the opiates that are prescribed in the surgery room and those in the recovery room. They can be intravenous or oral opioids. So what is prescribed in the recovery room? We know because it's recorded electronically. But in our health board, what's prescribed in the surgery room, we do not know because it's recorded on paper. So the other thing that we do know is that intravenous and oral opioids differ in their probability of affecting delayed discharges. Here you have the number of opioids you equidosis a patient received and the probability of delayed discharge. So the flatter the line, the better of a drug option it is. So we have fentinil for intravenous and we have morphine and oxycodone for oral ones. So what did we do? We put these two pieces of information together and we in close collaboration with both hospital managers and clinicians. Very importantly, we launched a data collection piece to evaluate if what happens in the surgery mimics what happens in the recovery room. So we know the effects that opioid recovery room prescription have and by mirroring that same thing in the operational theater. We hope to expand our efficiency gains and finally safeguarding our efficiency gains. For these I need to tell you about a problem the borders problem. Border patients are those that are not inherently DSU patients. They are just shoved into a DSU bed, day surgery bed because there's no capacity in other parts of the hospital. But they are a big problem. They can account for up to a third of the patients in the DSU and their numbers fluctuate greatly. They can reach nearly 50% with a a temporal variations. Right? So what did we do about this? Well, very simple in principle, but it stems from the close-knit collaboration with other aspects of healthcare. So we collaborated with the hospital managers to raise awareness so that we avoid feeling any efficiency gains in the DSU that we gained from this piece of analysis to avoid filling them with borders. No. Right. So now I'm going to tell you quite fast about four other findings that uh we were quite pleased to know about from this analysis which was an auditing more they fall more into an auditing piece which I think is another of our great responsibilities as analysts. So looking at quality of care deprivation effects and other aspects that can make our day searcher unit more efficient. So in terms of quality of care, I'm going to show you these two plots of the odds ratios that either anestheticists or surgeons had on affecting patients probability of being a delayed discharge. You can see that the names are deliberately obscured for confidentiality reasons. But all of them overlap with one, the odds ratio of one, which means we're proud to say that there's no evidence that any given surgeon or anesthesist affects a patient's probability of being a delay delay discharge. Great. uh homogeneous quality of care. Then moving on to health inequalities, we were really interesting to interested to know if deprivation affected patients probability of being a delayed discharge and here you have the deprivation quittles on the y-axis and you can see that they all overlap with one. So we have no s no evidence that deprivation has an effect. And the other thing is we wanted to know whether there were any inequalities in access to pain relief. So again the number of opioid equidosis a patient received and their deprivation quintile. Pleased to say that we have no evidence of health inequalities in access to pain relief. And finally when we analyze the temporal effects we found something quite unusual. So here are the odds ratios of the day of the week on the probability of being a delayed discharge. And if you're a Saturday patient, you're two times less likely to be a delayed discharge. So this is great. Why? So I was quite intrigued and this is because as part of a waiting as as initiative to reduce a waiting list, they introduced a new modus operandi for the day surgery unit that's different on the Saturdays. And basically this means that however they work on a Saturday makes a day surgery much more efficient. You might also see that um a Sunday patient is like five times more likely to be a delayed discharge, but that's a separate reason because technically the DSU does not operate on a Sunday. This is just reflecting emergency cases with a very reduced number of staff. So this is kind of expected because this is just emergency cases, not normal operations. Um so in terms of my conclusions well the DSU is 25% points away from their goal. We know now that most factors that are delaying the operation what delaying discharges can be planned for if not changed because we are they are known in advance. From that we derived oper actionable insight. So we changed operational metrics to make them more realistic by removing thyroid patients. We also produced evidence-based changes in prescribing practices to improve the efficiency of the unit. We brought awareness to managers so that we avoid feeling any gains with borders. We also realized that the waiting list initiative modus operandi that happens on a Saturday makes it far more efficient. So maybe something to learn from for the weekly operations. And then we are pleased to know that we have homogeneous quality of care. We're also pleased to know that there's no evidence of health inequalities in what we tested. And we're going to evaluate the impact of the changes that we implemented further down the line. This is going to be facilitated because we used a reproducible analytical pipeline. And before I close, I just wanted to hone in what were the key things to making this such a successful project. On the one hand, being able to link these massive amounts of data. So outpatient, inpatient, lab tests, diagnosis, demography, community prescriptions, theaters, data, primary care, hospital prescriptions and also probably most importantly the close-knit collaboration between analysts, clinicians and hospital managers from start to finish. And a great uh kudos point for all my colleagues that help with the data linkage. And with further ado, I hope I demonstrated to you the power of using of analyzing link data to achieve strategic objectives, provided some understanding on the factors that delay discharges in DSU and how we use them to produce actionable insights that improve healthcare quality and happy to take any questions. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much for for that, Nora. uh an intriguing piece on on the the power of of linked data and the benefits of of that. There was some some really uh staggering results in there and and great to see the analysis um resulting in in actionable uh insights. We've got about 5 minutes left for uh Q&amp;A and there's a couple of questions in the chat which we'll we'll just come on to. I just wanted to to note that there has been an issue with attendees being able to to see the sessions in this stream and there has been a a temporary fix uh sorted. So So now we've uh I think it was around the start of this uh Norah's presentation. I saw a lot more people join which is which is great. Uh and the team behind the scenes are just working on that to to get it um more of a a sustainable fix in in place. Um, so we'll just now move on to to the Q&amp;A segment. Um, so we we've got a question from from Julian. Um, how easy or difficult was it to get the clinicians on board with with changing their clinical practice? Um, and did you get the common oh yes, we know that uh and why it happens uh answer for for any of those those changes. &gt;&gt; That's a great question, Julian. Thanks very much. Um so I think we were quite lucky in that the clinicians had a very strong interest in actually understanding what what was a problem or what factors contributed to that. So when so I would say the answer is it was easy but it stemmed from the fact that we this was a long-term project. It developed over 12 months and we had very regular recurrent meetings with the clinicians. So you kind of build that relationship where you provide constant feedback and demonstrable evidence. And so basically you say this is what the data shows by this time you've already had a rich dialogue. So you have a a tiny bit of understanding of how it operates and then you say based on this data and you are the so I'm the data expert you are the ground expert let's see what we can co-design together and so they obviously provide the functional insights and it's I would say it came about quite natural but because it was founded on this long collaboration and oh yes we know that and why it happens. That was that was one of the that's exactly what happened with the waiting list initiative. So if you see that the Saturday one was less likely to be at the latest discharge. I was like I don't understand why why Saturday and Sunday are so contrasting. And then they were like well Sunday it's because it's emergency procedures but Saturday it's actually quite interesting and it's because the day surgery operates very differently. And that's they knew that and then they were like okay we're going to escalate this to the managers to see what realistically can be improved during the week. And basically it's very simple. It's because during the week they stay they have a shift fixed shift pattern. So the nurses and staff have to stay until the end of their shift. So normally apparently there's some tasks nurses and ward staff don't like to do and so they they delay other aspects so they don't have to go and order the cupboards and stuff like that. But on a Saturday they get to go home as soon as they finish. So they don't expand tasks to take up time. They just get it done and that's it done. How much can that be changed on the weekly procedures? I don't know. But at least we know there's an effect. Um yeah &gt;&gt; that's right. Yeah, it's really interesting to to hear about that that Saturday uh and the difference between between the the the two. And just a a final question in the last couple of minutes we've got from from Hannah. Um did you look at health inequality factors other than deprivation? Um Hannah can't remember whether ethnicity and gender are included in in the model as as well. &gt;&gt; Well, we included sex. We don't collect data on gender, but we included sex. Um and ethnicity and um I don't think I included ethnicity. Our ethnicity data is quite patchy. Um just presented it and I actually can't remember. Uh I'm going back on my slides to give you a correct answer. No, we did not include um ethnicity. We include other things like next of kin because there was whether patients had a next of kin declared on the system. Uh but yeah, sorry we did not include ethnicity. Thanks for got a bit of background noise uh there, but uh that is us uh at time.