So the next bit really we're going into that kind of meet and greet and and what I'm going to do now is is kind of show you what that looks like. Um and I'm going to show you the back end of things. So what we're calling the backstage. Um and I'm going to show you that from a host point of view. Uh just so you can see how much um how much we will be doing. And then I have also um looped in my wonderful assistant for today which will be Mimmuda who Mimmuda will be playing the the um the space of a speaker. So yourselves so you can really see that those two different spaces. So um here we go. So I will just point out this is just a test set. Uh so this isn't on the actual platform itself. It's what I've built for today to just show you how it would work. So, when the agenda or the program is live, this is how these can pop up. Now, if you're a speaker, um what will happen if you're a speaker assigned to a se a session, you will have in the corner join as speaker um which is really quite a nice little touch that they've set up. So if I go back into the agenda as you've seen with matche here as it says on the appro on the program if you are a speaker assigned to a certain talk or presentation it will have a little button that says you can join a speaker and what you do is you click on that and it pulls you through um into the backstage. Now I'm going to be difficult to not go that way purely because I'd like to show you the space as a host. Um, so I am going to go here. I will click in. I just need to I'm just moving this out of the way before I Right. So, what you will then have and this will be the same for um a speaker is my camera isn't working and that's only because I'm on uh teams and it it my camera can't split in two. But when it comes up, in fact, do it this way. It should uh Yes, it will sort itself out in a minute. So, what this will do is you can test your devices before you go into the backstage element. So it will look at your camera, your microphone, your whether you guys can hear that, but it it tests your speaker system so that you can check and it will also check your server connection status um just to make sure that everything is running with the system correctly. And it's just that little bit of um I guess just that little bit of uh less worry I guess when you're coming in that it is working and it's okay. I do know it works. It's just taking a bit of time. Okay. So what I see as a host is I see the entirety of the backstage. And so right now, Mimuda excellently has already uh logged in like I showed you um or as a speaker. So I can see Mimmuda's little thing here. So as as a host, I can pop her on the screen um and I can also add in her slide deck. Now that's a screen share. So what Mimuda is Oh, there she is. What Maruda is currently doing, which a lot of you will be doing, um, is sharing your own screen and then as a host, what I will be doing, is I will be adding you into those spaces as and when you you need to be there. But I think it's really important to understand that this backstage bit here is a really good space to make sure that everything is working well and everything is is is kind of succinct and it's a space that you can I was going to say hang out but I don't know whether that's the right word but that's what I'm going with where you can kind of hang out get a bit of a gist and and maybe have just a couple of minutes to calm before your session. The really good thing about this backstage part um is there is something called a panel chat. Now this panel chat is just between the hosts and the speakers. So when you come into this space and mimmud will show show you um your version in a minute. You will be able to talk to me straight away. Um I say me but any of the hacker team straight away. Um and you can ask anything like you know I might say to Mimuda um how is your slides anyhow and that obviously will be sent to Mimmuda um in in the backstage space where we can start to sort that out. Uh we go. So, as a speaker, um, I would pop Muda into these spaces and then what as a I would then do is pop her into the stream. When the host says that they're going live, what it does is it does you a countdown of 10 seconds. Is it sec? Yeah, 10 seconds. So this just gives you a couple of sec literally a couple of seconds just to kind of uh get in the zone. I guess what is very good for the host which will help you as presenters is they are able to see alongside this what the attendees see. So, the reason I'm showing you this is because I think sometimes when we're presenting online, it can feel a little bit like as a presenter, you're having to do a lot of the the heavy lifting and a lot of the work yourselves. And that can be really overwhelming when you're trying to also present. And the reason I'm showing you this end of it is because actually it gives you a really good overview of that will be the job of us. What we will be doing as those hosts or as as a as a host in your space is we will be moving you into the stream, adding in your your shared screen so you can do your presentation and then obviously supporting you through that Q&amp;A and then removing you back into that backstage space. Um all the while checking that in that attendee um environment you're being shown well. Um, and obviously it's it's clear. Um, so that's my end of it and I think it's probably about right to send over to Mimuda to see so you can see your side if that's okay. I'll stop sharing so then my mood can show. There we go. Right. I'm just trying to make sure I'm sharing the right thing. So, can can everybody see this now? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um, perfect. So, um, Nat was showing you the host version and as a speaker, this is kind of like what you see. So, it's very similar anyway and you have a lot of the same functionality too. Um, so I can see that I'm a speaker there. Uh, and this is the backstage, but um, I I can also see that the stream uh, what the attendees can see is just this. So that's my camera and also the screen that I'm sharing. And I could also see what is going on backstage. Uh and that's Nat who's backstage and she can't be seen by the attendees. It gives you this really cool when you log in it gives you this little uh take a tour button. So it can show you which what the different functions are as it's doing. So here one of the things that we can do is that um if we do have any issues or you have any issues accessing uh the chat what we'll do is um we'll copy uh an invite guest uh link and we'll send that to you directly. So there's always a backup plan to the backup plans. So the backup plan to the backup plan is if you have any problems joining um just drop us a message one of the hacker team or or drop us an email and what we'll do is we'll send you a direct link to this specific session um and then once you click it you'll be pulled straight directly into this and then you just join and you'll join automatically into the backstage. Um, and then the host chair or room lead will pop you onto the stream when it's ready for you to do your talking or your bit. And it's very similar on this side as well. I can see all the various bits that N can also see. You'll be able to see the attendee chat, uh, the panel chat, Q&amp;A, um, when people are asking questions. Um, you can add different bits of content here if you want to. So these are just advanced functions but uh we expect that we'll mainly be using the attendee chat Q&amp;A uh and the panel chat is uh is your point of call for any any of your needs if there's anything going disastrous disastrously wrong which hopefully won't be uh but also if you need uh to ask any questions um once you're getting ready for your session or just after. So I think that's it. &gt;&gt; Yep. I I think the only really big thing that is different on the host side and again I think this will be a conversation that would be had um beforehand is there is an ability um if somebody raises their hand to have them added onto the screen alongside you. So this isn't something that is uh that we that we are currently using um but it is is an option um and that's for that Q&amp;A space but predominantly and more routinely the Q&amp;A space would be would kind of be managed through this here um and again your host will will help you with that because I think um it can be quite hard can't it when you're trying to you're trying to present Um and then what and then you've got quite a few questions coming in and that kind of needs to be just just filtered and managed a little bit I think. Um, so all of that is managed back end and then once you finished your so if for example Mimuda has done as always a wonderful chat um it's now the end of her chat. Uh she's had excellent questions. She's absolutely blown the socks off everybody but it's now time that she would like to go backstage and have a cup of tea. it is the host um job to remove you and that is a simple removal of both Mammuda and her screen and you just go back into that backstage space with me or maybe not me but with your host where um com you know chats a conversation can be had or it might just be that you'd like to leave the session um and and carry on your day watching um other other excellent talks. So it is quite simple um but but simple in a good way I think is is really the the thing we're going for here. Um now the other part that we talk about quite a bit is let me see here we go is the workshop spaces. So again here you would be set up if you're doing a workshop you would be set up as a host or a moderator um as I am here. Uh and again well now I've got my face on it. Marvelous. Uh, and again what it will do is when you open that up, as you can see, it goes out and tests um your camera and your um and your kind of equipment, it you can do the test down here. Or if you've already done it beforehand, you can just obviously join via this. Now, as a um as that host or as that moderator, what is really good is you have the ability to present and share your screen. Um and in that present space, let me find something to um I'll present you all back for a little bit. Uh you can have either yourself here. So if I apologize, you can probably all see me in this tiny little um so you can have yourself here and and and be showing as so or if you wanted to, you can turn yourself so you're off screen um and you're just showing uh your your screen. Uh and what that does or what that will allow you to do is have that that flexibility and that functionality in those in those workshop spaces. Um the other thing that is really quite nice in here as well is because is you have like your countdown which some people love and some people hate but it is quite nice for timekeeping. Um because I think when it comes to workshops we all rabbit hole. I think it's quite a common thing for us to do. Um, but this just allows you to to know quite quickly how how much time is left in this space. Um, and and uh you know if we need to if you needed to move things along again as um a uh as a host you also have a live chat space for this room. Um and again you have the same bit bits that a speaker has and with the Q&amp;A from your space as a host you can moderate this if you wanted to. So you can look at the Q&amp;As that are coming in and accept or reject um as as and where you feel that that is that is appropriate. And you can also if you would like to um have a bit of a a sneaky sneaky sneak about who is in the room with you. And what's really nice is when you do have friends, which I do not, um they do come up here and what you can do is move them. Um so if you would like them on the screen, you can move them from spectator into that space of participant. Um and that is something that you're able to do. Um and again if someone raises a hand because they want to ask a question in that more workshopy environment you can again pop them onto the screen. Um there is a limit to how many people can be on a screen at once. Um and to my knowledge I think that is 12. Um but I can double check that. Uh, however, I think maybe um 12 people all on the screen all talking at the same time would be quite intense and probably not something that a workshop would really be looking for. But again, um that is absolutely down to you and and what you would like to do um with this space. So that is uh a quite uh quick tour um of a workshop. Um I've just you just trying to check yes 12 participants at one time and that includes a screen share. So again, you can have quite a busy busy front if you'd like to. Um, seems quite intense to me, but that's just because again, as you can see, I have no friends. So, and I but for others that are a bit more sociable um and want that like that kind of more rich engagement at the front, that that is a really good thing that we can that this this space can facilitate.