Hello everyone. Um, welcome to the um, targeting care and advancing analytics stream. Um, thank you very much for joining us. I hope you enjoyed the uh, two uh, keynote speeches. Um, just finished hopefully. Um, it looks like we've got quite a few people here already. So, I won't I imagine a few people will be transitioning over from those keynote speeches just as they're finishing up, but it looks like we've got quite a few of you here. So, um, just do a little bit of kind of housekeeping to start off with really. So, um, please do kind of, uh, put in any questions for the speakers in the Q&amp;A session section of the, uh, panel that's to the kind of right of your screen. Um, you can also upvote other questions, questions from people as well. Um, if we don't have time to get to those questions or uh, if you [snorts] even if we do or you just want to chat, there are kind of a kind of networking lounge options as part of the conference as well. So, please make use of those too. Um but without further delay I will hand over to our first speakers Isabelle and James who are going to talk about the triple threat analyst. So over to you. Thanks Sam. Um so I'm Isabelle. I'm a public health intelligence analyst and I'm also an apprentice on the level seven health and care intelligence specialist apprentices apprenticeship. So a couple mouths there and I'm here with James. &gt;&gt; Hi everybody. My name is James Harrison. I am a principal knowledge transfer facilitator which I'm hoping will become a little bit more uh obvious as we go through this talk. Uh hand back to Isabelle. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; Lovely. So we are going to have a look at what we think it means to be a triple threat analyst. Um so when we think of analysts hopefully we think of analysis. Um perhaps some of the types of analysis that we see on the screen. A lot of the time we are describing, exploring, explaining, maybe even forecasting or estimating impact and cost. Um, and then we take a step back from analysis and we think, well, what makes up an analytical project and there's a little bit more to it. So, usually we start off um with some kind of problem to solve, some kind of question to answer, and we go away and we think, well, where can we find our data that answers that question? Is it good quality? Is it timely? Much more to it. And then we've got this part in the middle, which some of us may think of as the fun part, the analysis itself. And then we're sharing those results, sharing our findings or what we didn't find. um and perhaps affecting some kind of decision or some kind of change, but not always. We have some kind of answer anyway. And those are both from Advancing Analytics in the NHS, which is linked in the slide. Um so what do we mean by a triple threat analyst? These are some of the things that we've picked out. There's a lot more to it. Um but we'll start off with analysis and we want to take that a step further. We want to develop and utilize modern analytical techniques. So developing our knowledge, following best practice and sometimes perhaps moving away from traditional tools like Excel or SPSS to coding methods perhaps R and Python that give us a bit more customization and a bit more freedom with our analysis. We've got knowledge to action or Kateway. So moving past just the analytical bit, we want to be involved in conversations throughout. So at the beginning, we as analysts probably know what's possible or what's not and we can help with setting expectations at and scope. Um and at the end, we want to share what we have done and make people care. You know, what is the point in kind of doing all this hard work if no one looks at it, no one knows about it, and no one even cares about it. Um we want people to care. We want action. Um but we'll come back to the K2A cycle later. Very exciting. Um but that kind of moves us on to the next part which we've taken as teaching and knowledge transfer. So we want to be opening our mouths bringing people along through the teaching create that intelligent customer and kind of share what we've learned as well. And there is much more than just a triple threat analyst quadruple quintuple how many far however far you can go. So you've got things like evaluation, stakeholder engagement, leadership, QA, I think the list goes on. There is a Wikipedia page with tupole names if you want to see what kind of analyst you are. So how can we as analysts build upon our analysis, all our hard work, all the numbers, all the fun stuff. Um, and we need to talk to people about analysis. Um, so that could be getting involved in networks. You've got things like community of practice, community of improvements, any other communities that you're aware of. Um, and we want to join those and maintain those good relationships. A lot of the time, this is where our users are. This is where questions are asked, answers are wanted. Um, and perhaps where an analysis is initiated. Um, and we want to kind of share our work. We want to do these presentations. We want to share what we've done, but also share what we're planning to do. to, you know, get people excited. Um, but we're not just sharing results. We also want to share methodology and best practice helping to develop others in their teaching. Um, and then throughout, not just at the end, we've got feedback and evaluation. So, you know, what do people want? What can we do better? Is this having the impact that we want it to? Um, and for a lot of us, that feels a bit out of our comfort zone. So we kind of feel like this little one in the corner here a bit in the deep end. It's a bit uncomfortable for us. Um so to partially quote Buzz Lightyear, we've got to analysis and beyond and these are the some of the things that I've focused on. So I've been in post about 9 months now. Um and prior to that I had a bit of a mathematical background. So I've got a degree in maths and stats and I'm also on the apprenticeship. So that has helped to kind of guide some of my learning and development, but it's not been limited to that. Um, I've got an excellent mentor in my team who's helped me with my coding, so data visualizations and data wrangling. Um, not to split the room, but I personally prefer R over Python. Uh, but that may be because I have a stats background. Um, but that's been really helpful. And the next two I suppose are kind of linked. You've got facilitation, so chairing and hosting meetings and presenting work. And when I initially came into the job, the idea of both of those kind of filled me with absolute dread and terror. Um, and it's kind of been a bit of a learning journey, starting off small and kind of growing my confidence. Um, and now I'm presenting at Hacker, so hopefully it's done something. Um, and then I I love learning and I didn't think I'd like training and kind of helping people, but I've really I've really enjoyed sharing that and helping to develop others. Um, and then these are some of the things that I'm kind of working on at the moment or our next steps. So, working more on specialist stats. So, I've recently gone through the GSG, the government statistical group badging process, which is kind of an online test and an interview, and it's like a little certification almost to say that you can do stats or have the stats knowledge at a certain level, and we'll give you a little a little badge for it. Um, unfortunately, that didn't result in a pay rise, but hey ho. Um, and I'm also trying to kind of include stats in a lot of the norm that I do with my analysis. Uh, more coding. I think there's always more coding to be done. Perhaps I'll loop back to Python at a certain point. Maybe not. Um, and then evaluation and critical appraisal, kind of building up that evidence base, which is a bit of a buzz word, but um, always important to do, but I think the biggest thing for me has been starting off small and building the confidence and stepping out of my comfort zone. Um, but this isn't just a look at me and look at the things I've done. you know, I've had a great manager and a great team and in my organization, people have found these opportunities and kind of nudged me in the right direction. Um, so I'm very thankful to everyone out there and I will now pass over to James to talk about the K2A cycle. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thanks very much Isabelle. So yes, so we we spoke about knowledge to action and knowledge mobilization and this is essentially how we in Elkis structure our um approach to uh looking at how we how we may create analytical products that may hopefully answer and uh as as Isabel Isabelle showed uh enhance decision-m and we want the analyst to be involved at all parts of this. So as you can see the knowledge to action cycle runs from scoping through to planning through to implementation through to evaluation and also it's a continuous loop. So it's an audit cycle within itself. Um and then as you can see at the at the outside there's this continuous engagement and we want the analyst to be there right at the very beginning and we put the analyst there right at the very beginning which is to be able to talk to the customer about what are their needs, what are their issues, what are their priorities potentially be the opportunities and importantly uh when we're working with modern data today the limitations around what can be done. So the expectations are really kind of being able to be addressed right at the beginning and and Isabelle stated about make creating the intelligent customer really fueling that conversation between two separate distinct groups of people but actually hopefully getting on the same page really early because then that goes into the planning stage. So what is possible? What are the multiple options that could be delivered? actually looking at an array of uh of roots, not simply just a dashboard or not simply just an Excel sheet, a worksheet, but actually thinking about actually how do we uh manage and and answer some of these uh uh burning questions right at the um right at the beginning. And most importantly, this is where the fun part comes in as well around that building, that testing, that developing, but doing that as collaborative, doing that in in continuous engagement with the customer. So make sure that you're building to their requirements, not necessarily or simply our assumptions. And then there's the implementation. And what we know is that we we we tend to build and deliver analytical products, but actually they get into the hands of multiple users. Multiple users therefore have multiple needs, multiple questions, multiple different approaches. And we find that the analyst is perfectly positioned to be able to support and enhance and advocate for the use of these products. Right? Again um from the beginning which actually creates a much more beneficial um communication between the two. The analyst is able to understand how people are utilizing their products and also the user is able to get immediate responses from uh an analytically minded individual. And then evaluation. So actually evaluation not being simply uh uh added right at the end saying oh we should probably you know see whether people like this or not. Actually thinking about it in terms of throughout the whole of the scope plan implementation uh cycle but actually using evaluation to understand use evaluation to actually seek to improve products and again continuously engaging with users. And actually I've just got a little um uh plug for my evaluation for an evaluation um framework session today at 2:30 with Elkis colleagues. So if you're interested in embedding evaluation, please do look out for that. Uh next slide, please Isabelle. And we thought some kind of conclusion and summary because I don't really think that there's much to conclude around this. What we're essentially looking at here is the fact that analysts are exceptionally gifted and talented people. Absolutely. You know, some of the things they're able to do is is phenomenal to me. Um but actually this is across both an individual, a team, an organization and a system culture of utilizing our analysts much much much more. Um and I think that that boils down to the fact that the individual they need to be kind of you know driven to succeed and have a role in planning their own uh destiny and a lot of that is around seeking your personal development and opportunities very much stepping outside of your comfort zone actually networking communicating a huge parts I find around actually being better analysts and also getting our work out there and and hopefully something like hacker is a is a perfect testament to that. Then we've got the team and actually developing a team which has a culture to de uh to grow and develop our skills. So look actually the team are thinking about where can we embed an individual here. How can we develop this individual actually making sure that development is at the heart of uh team culture not simply just allocation of jobs to each roles but actually really looking at uh supporting and developing individuals and and both of those the individual and the team can really be stretching and challenging in your team. You can actually have an approach which says this will be hard. This will be difficult. This will need you to utilize new skills and you may fail and it may not come as as as as well as you were hoping but actually that stretching and challenging can be really opportunistic to find those um those areas to actually enhance your skills and and as Isabelle says put you out of your comfort zone. Then you have this kind of organization approach and the fact that the things that we can do at scale within an organization. So we can collaborate our skills and development that the aspects of the culture are looking at how we cross a uh across multiple parts of the organization. And we find that things like apprenticeship schemes, succumbments, actually having a modern IT practices where an IT system is there to enhance um our analytical ability uh rather than impinge it and actually again looking at networks and communities and practice and and having those um in sections between different organizations and then the things we can do as a system and again I think this is what we'll see at hacker a lot actually what can we do for the analytical workforce things such as for instance the national competency frame framework and growing that outside of pure analytics into this world of um of of knowledge mobilization and actually kind of enhancing our role there. Looking at opportunities, looking at actually workforce development paths, making sure that our analysts don't simply just become managers of analytical teams, but actually have real roots and and as uh Isabelle's already explored, things like the uh government statistical service, the government statistical badging, apprenticeships, and uh being involved in CPD. Next slide, please, Isabelle. So, finally, we just want to say that yes, some of this might be in at the deep end, but actually becoming a triple threat analyst or a quadruple threat analyst or however many opals you want, actually, I'm hoping I think makes a much more rewarding, well-rounded individual who's happy to be kind of in in the system, in the pool, actually enjoying their time at work. So, um that's it for us today. Just a thank you. Thank you to Isabelle uh for I mean essentially being just an amazing triple threat analyst. We've had about six months of Isabelle so far and it's been well actually eight months and it's been phenomenal. And also opportunities for you to ask any questions. So Sam, if I pass over to you if there's anything in the chat. &gt;&gt; Thank you both. Yes, thanks both for a great uh um yeah, great presentation. Um there are a few questions in the in the chat. I'm not sure we'll have time to go through all of them, but I'll perhaps flag a couple and if you got some any quick answers or quick kind of like reflections on them, maybe that'll be helpful. But also quiet ones. There's a few basically around kind of um development opportunities and experience opportunities for analysts and kind of where there are those opportunities. Someone asked about the stats course that you mentioned, but also any other kind of further kind of opportunities develop develop. Now, um if you either of you got any quick thoughts on that, that would be great. So, I think this is probably a question that a lot of people are going to have and it might be a good topic as well for those of you who are interested to flag in the network lounges and get other people's input into as well. But yeah, James Isabelle, I'll head over to you to see if you get a quick answers on that one. &gt;&gt; I was going to say in in terms of opportunities though because there is a bit about that. We've got Sarah Blundell on there. So, one of the greatest opportunities you can have is to join analyst X and connect with uh analysts across the country because there's lots of learning and development opportunities there. And I think look when we are when we think about opportunities we have to think about the idea that that this this kind of do you know about the 10 20 and 70% rule whereby probably only about 10% of our learning will come through structured courses 20% of our learning will be a bit like Isabelle was talking about being sitting with people developing your skills having mentors having people and then 70% could be around those those natural interactions of finding um uh opportunities that will be embedded within your organizations within your systems And really hopefully having a team a line manager and an organization that has that approach. And again just to plug hacker uh this is the type of place that you can find those opportunities as well. You have to connect but uh connection networking can be a really good opportunity for that. &gt;&gt; Thanks. And the other question which I think um again is something that was comes up a lot in this arena is around kind of technical language and someone saying that they've witnessed early conversations where the client customer knows what they want but they don't necessarily seem to speak the same language as the analyst and that being a challenge to come over which I've witnessed. I think some of what you've just said around developing those networking and having kind of lots of conversation with other people uh as an analyst having conversations with other people and learning what their language is and bottoming it out on this from my perspective bottoming it out and kind of getting you know past any shared misunderstandings is helpful. Um but yeah James Isabelle any other kind of reflections on that issue? &gt;&gt; I think it's important that actually the continuous engagement this does not come overnight. you you know you have very technically skilled people, analytically skilled people and you have people that really truly understand pathways, programs, uh interventions, etc. The more that they talk together, the better their conversations will be. I don't think this comes, you know, instant. It isn't instant. You have to kind of learn people's working practices and approaches. But actually, it definitely improves and becomes much more kind of um uh comfortable if you're continuously engaging with them. if you're thinking does this work for this person rather than does this work based on my assumptions. &gt;&gt; Yeah, great. Thank you both. I think we better stop there because we've gone a bit over time but we are now in a break time so I haven't imprinted on anyone else's talks. Um yeah, there is now a break until 11:20 and then in this stream the next talk will be from uh Louise Kllen about empowering women and strengthening strengthening the analytics profession. But thanks again Isel and James for your talk. That was great. Thank you both very much.