Hello, welcome back everybody uh to the closing session of hacker uh today. I hope you've all had a really excellent time today. Um I've had great pleasure of introducing lots of brilliant speakers today and now is no exception. Um so we're going to have uh Ben Goldacre from the Bennett Institute to uh close us off. Just very quickly before we bring Ben on, I just want to just say Ben has been a great friend to the analytical community for some time. And one of my strongest memories actually the first hacker is Ben being there in the kind of dying moments. I think it's very easy for senior people like Ben with busy schedules to kind of just dip in and out and you know say the words and and leave. Um but Ben is you know and very much so at the NHS open analysis conference as well. Ben has always been there engaging with his people and listening to people. Um and I think that's really valuable. So, thank you, Ben. And uh I'll without any further ado, here he is. &gt;&gt; Hey, thanks and thanks for having me. Um I mean, I have to say I've been dropping in and out during the day and I am staggered not just by the quality of the content, but by the character of it. Um I dropped in on Phil Warmsley's session um just before this one and this was deep real technical content with the clinical aims clearly stated but then the mechanics laid bare the code on the screen the caveats present and a link to the GitHub repository at the end and I think it's a real reminder for those of us who have to I won't say trudge but uh travel around the various different conferences and events on NHS manship ship management and leadership and and um and digital in the health service. It's actually incredibly rare to see talks that go beyond what feels often like PR content and to get closer to being um a real a real community of practice by the people who do the real work and and that's what I think is really exciting and really fantastic and really unique about Hacker. Um, I do think it's a shame that [clears throat] it had to do it without national support. Um, I did a review for Secretary of State in 2022 and when you do things like that, you expect, and I mean this really seriously, you really do expect, and it is reasonable to expect that your recommendations will be a little bit like casting seeds, a little bit like how the Victorians had children. um three of them will die in childhood, three of them won't amount to much. One of them gets the farm and the other becomes prime minister. Um so in the recommendations that we made in that document, we recommended that the system moves away from a culture of disseminating data out to multiple locations and instead consolidated around building trusted research environments and that was very much adopted. I think it's fair to say that the system has had a challenge on delivery rather than policy there. But at the same time, these are big hard jobs to do and big hard jobs to do well. And it's really fantastic to see that um the data for R&amp;D program, the remote desktop TR in NHS England is doing really well. the open safely GP data platform that we run which I would encourage you all to look at and come and do work in the whole nation's GP data available for research and analysis for service monitoring and improvement um much more thoroughly and energetically adopted by NHS England. The recommendations around open working have been um somewhat adopted. I think that's a hard push for different parts of government, but it's been really interesting to see it becoming increasingly the norm. I think it's really striking that at an event like this, the message, the gospel of reproducible analytical pipelines has been so sort of deeply ingrained in the talks that I've seen that it would almost be a peculiar thing to see somebody saying, um, look, I I'm not going to tell you how I did the data preparation or um, I'm sorry to tell you it was mostly done in Tableau. That was mean. Tableau really does have its uses. Um the recommendations that I think weren't picked up as energetically by government were the ones around building uh capacity in the analytic community and in particular around um bringing structure to the analytic community and that's the thing where I think there's a lot of overdue work and events like this are a real reminder of the opportunities is it's not enough for all of you separately to be great at what you do. Um, individual people doing individual pieces of work once is fantastic for that single task, but then after that it's all gone. All those moments, not to quote Bladeunner in a professional context, will be lost like tears in rain. um unless you have the right systems and structures in place to catch it. Unless you have training programs, textbooks, conferences, online courses, the kind of supporting structures of of a profession. And so I guess to me thinking out loud, the thing that I feel that we really need and I'll talk in a moment about how we might get there is those structures. We'll know we've won when there are three conferences like Hacker every year. When there are 20 fantastic free online courses to learn about practical uses of NHS data. not um not a sort of vaguely adapted STA tutorial about calculating miles per gallon in a car, but given that there are thousands of NHS analysts working on NHS data, online courses where people can upskill themselves and learn not just use skills that they don't have, but learn about best practice in other settings where people like them but not them are doing similar tasks in other trusts, in other ICBs, where they can learn about practical uses of NHS data on real NHS data, real world examples. We'll know we've won when there are three textbooks on practical use of NHS data to improve NHS care published in one year. We'll know we've won when there are 10 professors of NHS data analytics in UK universities. We'll learn we've won when every NHS organization with more than 100 doctors has more than five NHS data analysts paid the same as medics. Now be careful who and what you benchmark your salary against. But the reality is still the analytic roles in the agenda for change pay and admin arrangements are still categorized under admin/clerical rather than technical/scientific. And it is still very hard to become more senior without either becoming a manager or by moving off into industry or by talking about esoteric methods by giving presentations passionately on the power of AI. There is obviously a role for AI in improving care, but there's also probably a bigger, more present opportunity in better [clears throat] delivery on practical analytics. And lastly, I guess the reality is we'll know we've won when all analysts can quickly access the data they need in a safe, secure setting. And with the third pillar that's most often overlooked of data infrastructure, which is adequate technical documentation made for them by their predecessors, written and organized by professionals whose job it is to make good technical documentation because technical documentation is, and this is not my best rallying cry, but technical documentation is infrastructure. So look, it's a brilliant event. It's long overdue and unique. Bringing together practical analysts working on real NHS data to address real operational challenges in the NHS is how we do good in the world. It's probably also certainly for everybody in this room, certainly this is my conclusion. If you're a public servant on a public sector salary and you've decided that you want fundamentally to help reduce avoidable suffering and death, sure, there'll be some drugs that have a reasonably better effect size than their predecessor, but probably the place where you can best inject yourself into the world, probably the place where you can put the lever that you have in 40 years of working life is of is through optimizing ing the logistics of the delivery of care and that is only done by the people who are here. So to get ahead to build a world in which we have the systems and structures around analytics that we need in this country I think the reality is you will have to be very propositional. I think it's not enough to grumble that things aren't how we think they should be. I think it's not enough to say how we think the world should be. I think for everyone in every organization, it's possible to think through what the pathway is, what the new projects are that will deliver real material value in this quarter or in this year, but that will also lay down good work that will allow good work to be done by other people more cheaply and more effectively in future years. That might be taking the onboarding that you do for new people who join your team and thinking about ways to put it online and then thinking about who you could apply for. And it may well be a crash and burn mission, but thinking about who you could apply for for funding to polish it up, to generalize it, to make it something that will work in other people's settings or data centers. to think about how you can pull together a a website that produces a community of practice around itself that grows and can facilitate new entrance and give them the work that they want. To be propositional about the courses that you can offer to build more people like you and to be propositional about the conferences and the events that you can run. The answer will almost always be no. But the reality is that progress is built by the people who know how to push through the nose, how to push back judiciously, how to drive the right kind of cautious controversy to overcome bad practice and push good practice. So look, it's 501. Um the one thing about this okay online platform for social interaction is that it's actually I've used it in other settings. It's all right for sticking around and networking. There are rooms and I will be in them until my children instruct me because it is a daddy night. I mean I present myself as an adult but then I use words like daddy night. Um, I will stick around until my children instruct me that I've neglected them for too long. And I hope to see you in those breakout rooms. Um, and I hope tomorrow is as uh smashing as today has been. Thanks all. Bravo. You are marvelous. Our cause is just and shall prevail.