Okay. So, um our next speaker starting the session is Steven Parsons. Steven Parsons is from uh Suffukk and um is Steven's gonna be talking about evaluating the right uh evaluating the impact of right care, right person. Hi Stephen. &gt;&gt; Hi everyone. &gt;&gt; Lovely. &gt;&gt; Thank &gt;&gt; we can see your screen. That's brilliant. &gt;&gt; Lovely. Cool. Thank you very much. So, um, yeah, thank you. Um, as was said, my name is Steven Parsons. I work for, um, Soda, which is the SuffK Office of Data and Analytics. And as we said, I'm here to talk to you about the right care, right person, um, dashboard that we have produced. So, um, a little bit of an introduction to Soda for you. So, we are a, um, function of the local government. So we are funded equally by um local authorities, Suffuk police and the um ICS um in Suffuk which is Suffach and Northeast Essics and um we are here basically to advance the um data and analytics agenda um across the SuffK system to build a local picture of Suffuk residents and communities. So um we were commissioned um by jointly by um Suffukk Constabulary and um the ICS um in Suffukk Northeast Ethics to um look at the impact of the right care right person initiative. So for you those of you who aren't aware right care right person was implemented across police forces in England and Wales um to look at calls that are coming into the police which aren't necessarily um the best agency to be dealing with those sort of situations. So particularly they were looking at calls for service relating to mental health um where uh the police um were often trying to work in partnership with other agencies but if the call came in to say one um 101 or 999 um but it was primarily a mental health issue that was being dealt with rather than um a crime that was taking place. um the police often felt like they weren't necessarily the best people to be dealing with that situation. And so since in in Suffukk since October 2023, they've um look to phase in the implementation of this initiative which um is effectively referring these calls for concern for welfare um to the right agency. Um so these uh were initially just for those concerned for welfare calls and then as it was implemented in phases. They later included calls for walkouts from healthcare facilities, those who um go a from mental health establishments and then also looking at the transportation of patients under the section 136 mental health act um where some of these patients were often being transferred in police vehicles which were necessarily considered the best um kind of method of transporting those patients. So they have um they were kind of referring those to other agencies as well. Now, initially there was a bit of concern among these other agencies that they were going to get inundated by um these uh kind of additional calls, additional demand on their services um that the police were previously dealing with. So um we were tasked to do an evaluation of that just to look at the wider impact on the system. So um yeah as I said um they the partners in the system who would be getting these referrals from the police they wanted to understand the implications of this initiative and so um what we did was to uh colleate the demand data across the suffix system. So particularly we looked at um data from Suffuk County Council and um the um health data and then matched that to the Suffuk Constabularies the calls that they were referring just to kind of see the levels of demand for services that were increasing or not depending on um how many of these referrals are going through. The one thing I do want to note is that we didn't um use identifiable data and track people through the system. So um we didn't require the additional governments that would be required for that. So um DPAs or ISAs weren't required for this project because we weren't tracking individuals from one organization to another. We were literally just looking at core volumes and the overall demand on the services. So how do we approach this? We um used suffuk constabularary data as our primary data source um and then built a powerbi dashboard to um track the amount of referrals that were coming out from suffer constabularary and then looked at the um so this chart on the bottom right here is showing um where in the blue and the uh green that is the um overall demand on the calls coming into um suffocabulary and Then from 2023 we've got um yellow and red which are two of the phases where we've been able to track um calls coming uh being referred through right care right person and then that's the sub you can see there the subsequent demand on the police dropping off what we were able to do is match these referrals to suffix population health management system which is Axiom which is a system provided by um the northeast commissioning service NEX and um as well as the children and adult social care data um which we collected from Suffuk County Council to assess the relationship between the referrals coming out and also the demand on these services. So what we did was to um produce this dashboard. This is an example of um one of the pages that um we produced for the ambulance services. So for this we just looked at um the uh for this particular chart ambulances dispatched for psychiatric conditions. Um so in the yellow bars here you have uh the referrals that have come through the police and then um in blue that is the number of um ambulances that were dispatched based on um the ambulances which were uh listed as having a psychiatric flag as the reason for their dispatch and then we collected that for the areas. Um it's slightly uh complicated in Suffukk because for Suffukk uh we actually span two ICS's. One is Suffuk Northeast Essex and the other is Norfolk and Waven. So we had to collect some of that data together from two population health management systems and then um track it against the police uh referrals. And you can kind of see here on the chart with the dots on the right, this is looking at the correlation. So as ambulance referrals went up in Suffukk uh through right care right person we did see a greater demand on the ambulance service. So we could kind of say that yes there is some kind of relationship. Difficult to um establish causation here but that wasn't necessarily the the goal. It was we we were trying to basically see is there a correlation between um between general increased demand on these services and we did find that with the ambulance referrals that we looked at. Um so for um next steps for the dashboard um we looked at the the purpose of the dashboard was primary to answer the question of what extent um is right care right person affecting the partner agencies and um how um the we wanted to assess the relationship between how these referrals from the police led to increased demand. um linking police data um South County Council and Health data we were able to show um broad in broad brush strokes that the services which were affected. So the ones that we looked at um were um ambulance where we saw the clearest correlation I showed you on the previous slide. Um but we also looked at the demand on uh 111 calls uh going into that service. Um we looked at the referrals with Suffach County Council. We looked at referrals into um other we also we looked at the referrals into um children and adult social care and those core volumes that went into there to see whether um and the multi- agency safeguarding hub in Suffukk we kind of tracked that just to see is there an increase in the kind of safeguarding concerns. Um but also from the health side we um as well as ambulance we also tracked um call volumes into 111 uh just to see whether that service in particular had increased demand with that. We didn't find much much of a um much of a correlation there. It didn't seem to have much of an effect. Similarly with um uh we also the other two areas that we looked at were um demand into emergency care partic that was really specific looking at kind of alcohol and um like substance abuse calls into emergency services. Again we didn't find a particularly increased demand there. And finally um we also looked at mental health uh referrals, mental health patients where there was some kind of police involvement or um or kind of involvement with a particular uh like mental health institutions. And again there weren't huge um correlations that we found. Um so um in some ways that was really encouraging uh because we found that uh there um that there was a big concern when this was initially um kind of proposed as an idea by the police that these services might be overwhelmed that they wouldn't be able to cope with this increased demand when they already had been facing resource pressures. Um however um we are aware um and it's really important to note that um that what I've presented here is just the quantitative data right and that numbers only really um tell part of this story um so one of the next steps that we're looking at for this project is to um do some more qualitative evaluation perhaps um set up some focus groups or um to um conduct some interviews with um partners and stakeholders in wider system just to see their perspectives on this as well because just because overall the demand doesn't necessarily show um that it's had a massive effect um it may be that in particular parts of these services they might find that and maybe if we tracked different things we might see more of an effect. So we really wanted to um look at the wider system impacts, look at um how one organization and one policy that an organization has has an effect on um other parts of the system because we're very aware that these these services are all very interconnected. Um so um hopefully once we do that qualitative evaluation we might be able to um give just a more rounded view of the um providing a deeper understanding of the impact of right code right person on the wider system. So that is it from me. Thank you very much for coming and listening. Um I'd be really happy to um answer any questions that you have. Um this is um Soda's um email address. So if you which will come through to me. So, if you um are interested, you want to know more, um do email us here. Um I'd be really happy to um kind of take you on a bit of a deeper dive of the dashboard if that would be interesting for you, if that's something that you're looking at in your area. Um so, yes, thank you very much for listening and um I will um stop sharing my screen. &gt;&gt; Thank you, Stephen. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; That was beautiful timing as well. We've got a couple of minutes left for questions. Um, and you can also, um, if you think of a question later, uh, find Steven on the participants and drop him a message. Um, I guess I was interested as a sort of analyst linking up stabri data, county council data, healthcare data. There must have been some big challenges there. What was like the the hardest, naughtiest problem you had with sort of linking up all these different &gt;&gt; bits of data? Yes. &gt;&gt; So, yeah, it was um it was really challenging. Um I think one of the um biggest ones was that our ax population health management um that was split across two areas. So, they were completely different systems. Um getting the same data out of both was complicated. Also, our um population health management is in a secure data environment. So, um we had to aggregate all of the data in there. um we pulled it out through a PowerBI gateway. Um and um getting the permissions and the understanding of what we were trying to do for that um was a big challenge. So that took a long time which is kind of why I'm presenting this now when it was instituted two years ago because it just take it just took a long time to get through those systems. So um like I said we weren't linking identifiable data that would have been a whole other layer of um of challenge but um but to to do this um across different organizations was was challenging enough in many ways. So &gt;&gt; yeah it's a brilliant piece of work. Um and then I guess you've got the challenge of what do you actually present in the dashboard as well right? you put all of that effort into pulling it out and then you have to work out well &gt;&gt; what what how do we want to tell this story and and who who who's trying to use that how is that bit of the process &gt;&gt; um yeah so that storytelling aspect I mean so the the charts that I showed of the ambulance that was quite typical I I did that for the for the mental health the ambulance um for the other kind of health areas and a similar system but obviously with Suffach County Council it was different data so for that I was much more looking at um like call volumes into their teams for um so we use customer first as our kind of contact center. So I kind of looked at that data. So I think it really depended on the data set um as to what how I kind of presented it. But um but yeah, I just I I think the main thing was the what I tried to do was because um the police data aggregated it by month, I was able to kind of show that tracking over time. Um because it's also something that would change as time goes on. So um yeah, so that that was the charts that I kind of showed were kind of fairly typical. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thank you. Thank you so much um for sharing your work here, Stephen.