Morning everybody. So I'm Peter Spilsbury. I'm director of the strategy unit. Um I want to welcome you to Hacker 2025. Um this is pretty exciting day for us. Uh a lot of a lot of uh stress and tension um as we uh kick this conference off. um but also a real sense of excitement about the um about what's on offer over the next two days. It looks like an absolutely fantastic final. Um AKA is now in its third year. Um it's the national conference for health and care analysts. um its origins um as as some of you might know um it came out of Professor Ben Goldacre's report um 2022 report. It had a slightly odd title I thought it was called better, broader, safer. Anyway, it was a really good report. It had a huge number of recommendations. I think um Ben probably wins the prize for for the most recommendations ever made in a single report. But anyway, amongst them, and I'm pretty sure for those of you who know Ben that he would have shouted them, sorry, but in amongst them were it's critical that we invest in the development of analysts. It's critical that we adopt the principles reproducible analytical pipelines of RA as a guiding principle for how we work open sharing analysis in the NHS. and he said have a conference. I can't do it completely. He does it. He will he will sort of yeah shouted it but you'll see him later because Ben is uh if you if you can make the time Ben is closing off uh day one of the conference uh end of this afternoon. So so go along here if you have one because he's got a unique way of presenting. Anyway, we agreed with Ben the hacker um is one of the results of that. So, hacker is unusual, I think, um in that it's designed and delivered by analysts for analysts. It isn't a commercial conference. Um no one's here to sell you anything. Um instead it provides two days packed with opportunity, multiple streams of opportunity in fact um as you would have seen if you've gone to the program opportunities to be inspired to feel part of a community to learn to connect to collaborate to borrow and to steal with pride to use that phrase. two days of presentations, posters, panels, keynotes, workshops, virtual connection spaces, whatever they are, but I'm sure the younger people amongst you will understand those. Um, and this year it's all shaped around such critical questions for the NHS as how do we understand and scale the shift from hospital to community? How do we improve flow across our systems? How do we effectively target care? And by the way, the answer to that one, it probably isn't whole population risk stratification despite policy enthusiasm for it. And if you if you're interested to to pursue that observation, join Steven Wyatt at his keynote later or drop in on one of Jess Small's presentations. Jess Jess who produced a really great um critical assessment of the evidence around restratification that was published recently. Um but the paper seems to be widely disregarded at the moment by policy makers. Drop into those sessions. Anyway, the vast majority of this conference is delivered by jobing analysts who submitted abstracts in order to be selected. um they're our peers. We should be proud and and supportive. We should thank everyone who's speaking and contri and putting their energy into into bringing this conference live because it's it is this sense of community that we want to generate. When you go to sessions, I'd invite you to critically appraise them. What do you think? Do you do you think the question or the purpose of the analysis um was clear? Do you think the the way the analysis was done is is uh credible and convincing? Is it clear whether it led to any conclusions or recommendations or actions? Um so apply your critical faculties but don't be a critic. your colleagues um have been brave and have stepped up to share their work as part of a journey of s of continuous and self-improvement and we should celebrate that and support um I feel I do need to just acknowledge that this is um is a very uncertain and difficult time for many colleagues with the reorganizations and the shrinkage let's try and think of a term that's going on at the moment across the health sector. Many of the analysts who currently serve the NHS face an uncertain future. I'm not going to debate the rights or wrongs of that, but I'm going to make an observation that we face a major challenge if we're going to deliver more an analytically informed decisions that the NHS critically needs with significantly reduced analytical resource. That's going to need there to be far more willing investment nationally I would say in the development of the analysts who remain and also we need a new approach analysts need to champion and exhibit a new approach to how we work that embraces analytical specialization that embraces effective collaboration that shows we can secure analytical econom of scale through avoiding duplication, but also I would say that recognizing that amongst the analytical community we've got at the moment across the NHS and across the care sector, we've got the skills we need to drive that improvement effort. If only we can get the right support and support for how we advise ourselves. There's an idea on the table that's gaining momentum at the moment about creating a national um improvement network for our analyst teams. There's a panel session about it this afternoon. Um, decision support network session I think it's called. If if you're interested, come to the session. If you're persuaded by the proposition, get behind it and support it. Anyway, back to today. So, hacker, give yourselves up to to these two days. Um, resist distractions if you can. It's two days. It's a long time. Everyone's busy. Everyone's stressed. But but these are two days for you as an analytical professional or as a committed user of high quality analysis. These days hopefully will celebrate and advance the contribution that you and your anal community can make to improving the lives of our fellow citizens wherever you end up practicing your craft and your discipline in the future. There are also two days which offer the potential to save multiples of two days later in the year because you might pick up a new method, a way of addressing a problem you've been struggling with. You might discover someone else has already worked on the very problem you're wrestling with and you can walk up to what they've done. You might find a colleague who's working on the same problem who you can join up with and share the load. There is huge potential in this to invest your time to just run by the strategy unit with my team. We're an NHS team. We are conference organizers by trade. Um, and also this year, just to be honest about it, not asking for any praise or anything, but this year we've not we've received no funding for other than the wonderful health foundation who've paid for this conference platform, which otherwise we wouldn't be prohibited from procuring the current rules. Um, but we think hacker really matters. We see the feedback that's come from the previous ones. Um, we hear the stories of collaboration has bought out of hacker. We see the the response from individual analysts talking about how important it is to them to feel part of the community and the hacker helps world. So, we've stuck in there and tried to keep it going. Um, and we've had some great support from an organizing committee volunteers who put their time. But what it means is strategy unit staff have had to pull together this two-day conference on a virtual platform that is new to us. multiple stranded thing um effectively out outside their day job. Now the reason why I'm mentioning that is for three things. First I want to thank because it's been a huge effort and challenge and and it's it just comes out of their general genuine passion commitment for making this thing work. Secondly, I want to ask you to just bear in mind that if we get any hitches over the next couple of days, it would be great to get constructive feedback, but just bear in mind where this has come from and that we're doing it effectively on a shoe stream to help us improve it for the future. But the third thing is help us make the case to continue it. I'm not exaggerating when I say it was seriously possible that hacker and the NHSR NHS open analytics conference at recently the new version of the NHSR it's completely possible that those two things would have fallen over this year without a little bit of financial support from the health foundation and HDR UK without us deciding we were going to do it despite the lack of any NHS funding this conference would have failed. Now, we're going to keep making the argument for why hackers important. We're going to keep resisting the sirens who tell us we should go for commercial sponsorship. We think it'll change the character or things. Um, but to make the case, we depend on you shouting for it. So, we need your feedback. We need you to write to me, to your boss, to your board, to Penny Dashes to talk to us next social media, whatever you want to write about. We need you to tell people why this conference is important and the difference it's made to you. We need the evidence to keep making the case so that hacker can become fixed part of the analytical ecosystem, the health of this country. Um, don't assume that someone else will do this. Just take a few minutes at some point in the conference to write down why this made a difference to you and why it should carry on because that's what we think should happen.