Um so next up we have uh another insight session uh with Nick Howlett who's uh senior data science at NHS Bristol North Somerset and South Brashshire ICB. Um this uh will be what looks to be uh another uh stimulating presentation on a study that's been done on A&amp;E crowding and and the impacts of of medical patient boarding. Uh just a reminder again that there will be a chance for for Q&amp;A at the end. So please use the the Q&amp;A function. Um and I'll now hand you over to to Nick for the presentation. &gt;&gt; Thanks James. Hi. Yeah. So uh I'm Nick. Uh good morning everyone. Um so yes, thanks for the introduction. So I work in Bristol as a data scientist uh and I work under Richwood in the modeling uh modeling analytics team at the ICB there and this work was also performed in collaboration with clinical supervision uh from James Cameron. Uh and yes so I'm going to talk about delay related harm which is a topic that has been uh a term at least it's been around for a while so you might have heard of it. I am going to introduce it slightly. I'm not going to introduce it in a chronological sense. Uh I actually think I'm going to start with uh a headline. Um so this is from the Guardian uh I think in April last year and this headline is telling us that uh England a weight times led to needless deaths of up to 14,000. So that's an annual figure and it's obviously very shocking and quite distressing. Um uh but I want to do the sort of analytical thing here and um park away the kind of emotional uh human reflection on this uh and actually celebrate this headline um because I think that it's a great example of very good scientific communication uh in just a handful of words. Um a huge amount of of effort behind the scenes in terms of model construction and and and problem solving and data uh sourcing. I can tell you it's a multi-year national data study that that led to this uh led to this statement. Uh and it can boil this down into this really sort of tur impact statement. And I think that's that's really cool. Um and I think it kind of it it offers for everybody something. Um I think if you are a layman or or someone that's you not not in healthcare or or or not analytically minded, you can read this and you can kind of get a sense of of what what it's saying. However, I think for the statisticians in the room, which I'm sure I'm joined by many, um you know, we want to learn, we want to know more. We want to know about how sort of how the sausage is made. So, I'm going to talk about how this is done. Um which is essentially by statistical modeling, regression modeling in this in this case. So, um the idea is it's quite a simple diagram I've got here, but you you take your outcome of interest, which here is 30-day mortality, uh and you try and associate it to uh an exposure. So you have an exposure group and and a certain exposure that that group is is is experiencing and you are trying to mine for an association there. Um by the way challenge for the audience. It's a fun visualization challenge trying to think of a icon for mortality that's um sensitive. Uh I I I will uh shamefully admit this was a skull and crossbones at a certain point and then we've migrated through a coffin and now we've ended up on on here. I think it's quite surprising challenge to try and come up with that. Uh anyway, so um the one of the powers of of statistical modeling uh is that it allows you to um build in uh other factors that might um impact on on the outcome that you're looking at and allowed you to control for them. So we we introduced these confounders and uh this was mentioned in the previous talk as well and these might relate to patient demography uh or or calendar type variables or or sort of the the health state of the of the the the hospital at the time of uh the event. Um so by building these in you can essentially statistically isolate the association given that you are um uh well covered in terms of what what confounders you've built onto the analysis. you can then uh posit that the uh what the model has has derived as the association between the exposure of interest uh is is a real effect. Uh and just for uh your reference, I've left a a citation at the bottom here. This is the sort of original article where where this this first bit of work was done which drove the um the headline before this was done in 2022 and it's not my work to be clear. Um and but this is where I was coming in. This is the context of where I was coming in. I was aware of this work. Um and uh the story goes that um I had a couple of spare weeks after finishing off some projects and there was some interest in our in our system to look at uh ED pressures. So uh I thought I'd have a look at this this analysis a bit in a bit more depth. And by doing that I actually reached out to one of our uh trusts in our system and I got in contact with uh with James Cameron who heads up uh the emergency department in one of our biggest hospital sites. Uh and it was you know like a match made in heaven. was already fully familiar with um this bit of analysis. He loved it. He thought it was great. Um and he had had his own ideas about uh things that could be could be performed in in terms of further work. And that really centered around shifting that exposure group uh from all ED admitted patients uh to specifically medical borders. Now, personally, I hadn't heard of this term boarding. Um so, I'm going to give a bit of a background uh uh on it. So there are many stages that patients go through when when they attend an A&amp;E and should a decision to admit be made uh there's often a delay essentially they start queuing for a a a bed in the acutes and and that time uh between the decision to admit and and the uh the admission to the ward is called uh the boarding time. Um, now there are cubicles in in emergency departments that are that are designed to take these patients, but they are often uh fully occupied. And so what happens is these cues start spilling over uh and these patients can end up being positioned in corridors, escalation areas, and in some cases in areas where there are, you know, X-ray machines and and things that are, you know, important diagnostic tools. Um, so not only are these environments inferior uh for the clinical care of those patients, but it also diverts resources uh from other patients who require emergency assistance. Um, and essentially, you know, you can imagine if you've got the system where you've got patients queuing in spaces they're not going to be just flow in general is is going to be impacted. Um, now medical patients are a specific cohort. Uh and just to define them, uh those are patients that are admitted to the um general internal medical uh specialties and the geriatric medical specialties. Um and they cover about 2/3 of all ED emissions, but when you slice their pie by how much time they wait, they actually wait proportionally longer. They they account just over 80% of all the ED boarding time uh is is incurred by by medical uh patients. So with that sort of background, our our study aimed to uh understand and quantify the impacts of medical patient boarding uh on on in uh six indicators of patient harm. So I we talked about mortality earlier. We actually expanded our our outcome measures across six different indicators and I'll explain those uh shortly um with the hypothesis that as well as direct impacts due to the delay in boarding um that patients will will incur there are indirect impacts uh on other patients requiring uh emergency assistance. and with all our bits of analysis, there's a sort of overarching aim that we want to increase visibility on this issue uh help build a shared understanding and provoke some meaningful change. So going back to my sort of diagram of a statistical model, I'm going to show you how how my uh diagram looks and how it differs. Um I've grayed out some of the elements here to try and keep it simple, but I'll be filling them in as we go. So starting with just the we had the same uh um outcome that that we were that was in the the first article which is that Thursday mortality rate. Uh the only thing that's really changed so far is that we've sort of shifted that exposure group. Hopefully you've understood that now that we're not looking now at all uh ED admitted patients. We are actually specifically looking at medical boarding patients and the exposure is no longer the full ED weight time. It's actually the the boarding time, the time spent waiting for a bed. Now, I've drawn this out in a kind of left to right pathway. If you consider this to be like a pathway through the ED, um we can talk about those impacts directly as being sort of downstream of the boarding which sort of sits in the middle there. Uh and you can think about impacts backwards as as being upstream. Um so filling in the rest of the picture uh the other downstream impacts that we uh considered were the 30-day readmission rate uh and the um medical length of stay. So given that we accept that um there's going to be harm in terms of Thursday mortality logic would would kind of give over that potentially also there'll be harms that will be uh manifested in longer med medical stays uh and higher readmission rates and then uh upstream from the boarding queue um we wanted to understand if ED weight times were going to be impacted by by high levels of boarding uh and if ambulance handover times also would be impacted and then if you can imagine that you've got large ambulance handover cues that therefore maybe uh ambulance response times were also going to be impacted. So those are our sort of six impact measures that we were looking at. Um and one last bit of nure or one last thing I want to add to the diagram hopefully it's not too complicated. Um is to just sort of a subtle point um so starting with the downstream impacts. So I've sort of said this already, but that that's the exposure there is the is the time waiting for a bed. So that is the delay and it's a direct impact on those patients that are delayed. However, it's a little bit different when you think about the upstream impacts. Um your handover time causally isn't going to be impacted by how much time you might then wait after you've been handed over uh in in the emergency department. So but boarding still impacts this, right? So these are actually impacted by the level of crowding and not by the delay itself. So we've got a slightly different uh exposure for our upstream impacts which is the um the boarding queue essentially uh at the time of your event be that your ED arrival or your ambulance handover or response. Okay. So that's the uh the sort of model framework. Um I spoke briefly about confounding variables. So I just want to quickly cover which um variables that we accounted for in our analysis. So we had some patient demography. So age, sex and deprivation uh were included as well as a co-orbidity score. Um and uh activity history and and that was in in uh in terms of how many uh A&amp;E attends the patients had in the last 60 days. Um we also included temporal variables. So the event time uh and month and whether it occurred on a weekend where those events are the ambulance dispatches or handovers uh uh or the um ED attendance. Um and then to those we also had outcome specific coariants. So depending on whether or not your outcome was delay mediated or crowding mediated we had these specific um confounders to help control uh and further isolate the the impact of interest. So in the delay mediated uh models we included the time to DTA. So that's all the time up until uh from your arrival to when the decision to emit was made. Uh and this allows the model to be able to isolate which component of the delay uh is is more explanatory of of the outcomes and then also patients with no criteria to reside at that uh trust site at the time of admission. So uh and this this is sort of subtle but um I think this is an important thing u when when we were sort of doing the problem structuring here. If you've got high levels of no criteria to reside uh which is when patients are medically fit for discharge but uh they need sort of downstream care and and that can't be procured for whatever reason. They end up residing uh in the acute beds essentially blocking them from new patients coming in. um which if you sort of zoom out and look at from a system level that's going to be increasing your length of stay and it's also going to be increasing your admission time. So we wanted to make sure we built that into the model to allow it to uh control for any exit block effects that might be increasing both of our both our exposure and our outcome uh as a kind of hidden variable. And then for the crowding mediated outcomes uh we included all other occupancy in the ED excluding our exposure group. Uh, and just to summarize, I actually had a slide on this and I removed it and I forgot to put it back in, but we we did this over um three sites in in our system. Uh, and it's about over just about two years of data. So, to summarize, I've got a kind of a big regression table here that just sort of shows the um the effects that we found. I don't want to list these out. I'm hopefully going to make them a bit more engaging with graphs and and some some dashboard stuff later on. Um but just to say in in summary uh that we found significant positive uh effects across all of our outcome measures. Um so uh we we you know we sort of found that that signal that this boarding issue um is is you know associated with with all these different uh measures of harm. I will point out one in particular because I think this one was particularly important for us to unearth which I've highlighted here which is this um impatient length of stay uh effect. So if you look at the exposure column on the left this is for every 4 hours of excess boarding time there's actually slightly over double that time then spent uh by those same patients uh in the acues. So to give some context, on any given week in one of our hospitals, we we can have many patients that that board for for 12 hours and that's essentially just accounting for a whole extra bed day that that's essentially um failure demand. Um so that's a really important thing to try to unearth. Um so I said I'm going to show some graphs. So this is for our upstream or our crowding mediated impacts. What I've done here is I've plotted the raw data, but I've used models to standardize for all of the confounders and then left the uh exposure on the x-axis and displayed the outcomes on the y-axis. So, if you see a positive trend, you can you can kind of you can glean that the increase here in in the boarding queue uh is is increasing the the outcome. Um, and as you can see, you sort of see these uh positive trends across across the board here. Um, one thing I will point out because I think there's a bit of a silver lining to this cloud. Um, it's the category 1 uh response. So that's on the top left uh panel. Um, that's the category one ambulance response. Um, there is a even though the model does tease out a sign significant positive association there and you can sort of squint your eyes and probably see it, it is very minor um which is kind of I guess um an indication that prioritization uh is working in those cases. So that those most serious critical cases are being uh responded to within targets. Um however we can see just on the on the plot below that for category 2 that's not the case. Uh as the boarding queue increases uh the response time also increases. Um and these are still very serious instances sort of strokes and heart attacks and really life impacting uh incidents. So it's yeah it's not great news. Um and just to just to finally say that the the dashed red line are the sort of targets that were supposed to be meeting. Um and the black dots which are the 90% quantiles are supposed to be uh under those. Uh so yeah, you can kind of get a picture there. And for the downstream outcomes um I can I've shown these as uh conditional effects plots. Um so these are kind of raw from from the final models. Um and you can kind of see uh what impact they're having. And it's similarly laid out as the last chart. So um you've got the exposure, which now is the boarding time uh in hours on the x-axis, and on the y-axis you've got the various uh measures of harm, be it days of impatient stay, the 30-day readmission rate, or the 30-day mortality rate. And as you can see, again, there's a a positive association there. um to kind of boil down some some kind of more rule of thumb kind of stats from this uh we computed a a number needed to harm uh for for the mortality from our cohort study. Um and we found that for every about 70 patients that were delayed more than 4 hours though there was one expected excess death. Um so yeah so this is that was the sort of modeling and and the results section o of my talk. I'm going to move on to some some of the the further work we've done and how we've tried to communicate this. I think I've actually got some time to very quickly flash up this diagram. Um this is this is sort of a brainchild of James. Um he's been super uh critical to us understanding this issue. Um and he sort of drew out this diagram and just to say this isn't sort of like cited or anything. This is this is sort of an idea that that he has and it's this this picture that he has of this cycle of harm. If you can imagine that um people are being delayed in the emergency departments and then spending longer in the acutes because of it and those are then caused those delays in the acutes are then causing uh increasing delays uh sort of downstream. You can see this sort of sort of negative feedback loop this spiral or cycle of harm as he calls it. Um so I I can't talk for too much about this. I don't have that much time. Um but yeah it's maybe take a screenshot of it. I think it's a fascinating way of looking at the system. So yes, so moving on from the static insights that I've just I've just presented to you. So uh to just I'm not trying to show off here, but we are very close to acceptance on our submission for this for this bit of work and I'll be very pleased to to forward a link when when I have it uh to the paper and you can dive into all the details. Um and so we we're really chuffed with that. We think in our team that's that's a great way of uh sharing our analysis and making sure that other people can reproduce it. Um however it's not necessarily the best way of communicating your results um to sort of exec level or or managers or planners in in your system. Um so we wanted to come up with a way of doing that because we felt like we'd already done all the hard work of doing all the modeling. Um so I want to point back to the very first slide which was that that headline right and that that's a good way of doing that. So we we thought well why don't we just design a dashboard uh to do that essentially to to generate these results dynamically because uh this data we get this data uh live weekly so we can just um dynamically refresh those impacts so we designed this dashboard uh with that in mind um trying to make this as simple as clear as possible uh and it looks like this um I call it excess impacts uh and the way that I've um that I've I've sort of done. This is slightly different to that article. I had my own sort of inspirational idea. I think I I quite quite pleased with this. I decided to present it as a sort of counterfactual what if style analysis. Uh so what you'll see so at the top you've got the kind of standard headline which tells you what happened in the last week. Uh and then in the middle you've got this column of bar charts. Now these bar charts have each got two bars in them, right? And on the left is the estimated impacts based on what actually happened according to the data. And on the right is a hypothetical situation of what we would estimate would h have happened uh given that you were able to keep your boarding times to under 1 hour uh and the boarding cues to under 25% of of the ED capacity. So this allows you to see what operational changes or if you had that lever to pull um what difference that would make in terms of for instance if we look at say the third chart down in terms of the cache 2 uh ambulance response time you can see that it makes a large impact in in bringing you closer to to the target. And so this dashboard uh refreshes weekly uh and it's helped us um basically uh explain these these problems uh and and make some make some meaningful change. So I actually probably won't talk about the deployment p. I'm looking at my time. I'm realizing I'm just about on time. So I just want to the last thing I want to talk about quickly um is some of the operational impact that that's that's sort of precipitated from this which is that based off of some of this work um discussions uh with with the hospital managers have I think in concurred um this idea that we're going to reinstate this continuous flow model um which is something that we did a few years back uh but it kind of fell out of fashion uh and essentially this this model shifts the admission from a pull mentality ity, i.e. the the wards saying they're ready to take a patient to a push mentality where you basically tell the the wards that at at specific scheduled times you will definitely receive admissions. So be ready for them. Um and the idea is that by doing that you're going to alleviate the pressure at the front door uh and hopefully the uh the downstream impacts will be felt uh you know after the you know due to the delay in or sorry the reduction in delay related harm. Now there's a bit of further work that I'm going through trying to prove that this is working. Uh so this is all sort of hot off the press. Um but I'll uh I'm happy to take more questions about that. I think I might be running over time. So I will uh just do my quick conclusion uh which that this research further establishes and quantifies the association between uh delay and specifically medical boarding delay uh and significant um patient and system harm. The deployed dashboard provides a mechanism for ongoing monitoring of of these impacts. Uh and and moreover it provides the modeling provides a framework for help hopefully measuring uh intervention effectiveness. So uh yeah that was me. Uh thanks for listening and back to you in the studio James. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Uh thanks very much for for that Nick and uh right on time as well. Um fascinating presentation on on the work you've been doing. I particularly like that that whatif analysis that you you brought in to towards the the end. Um, we've now got a a few minutes for for Q&amp;A. Um, looks like in the in the chat Norah has had a bit of trouble with the Q&amp;A function, so I don't know if if that's a common issue, but but please feel free to to put any questions in in the the main chat if if that's the case. Um, I think Nick, you covered off uh Nia's question about getting the link to the to the study already. Um, I don't know if that if that's available yet or or might be further down the line. &gt;&gt; I was really hoping it was. Um, but the third editor comments hit hit the email uh about a week and a half ago and so I'm busily trying to get those uh tidied away. Um, I think um it's it's actually good news. Maybe I'm trying to see see it with rose tinted glasses, but I think they're um they're really keen to make sure that it's just very clear and and and I think it's going to be a I'm you know, not to pat myself on the back, but I think it's going to be quite a big impactful uh bit of literature. So, I think they're just really keen to make sure it's all nailed down. So, I don't know what the best way of following up and and giving a link out. I was hoping to have a little snazzy QR code that just takes you to it. Um but unfortunately, it's not it's not quite there yet. Um but I um I mean hopefully uh when I evaluate the continuous flow I'll be back and I'll be able to at least link it then um and yeah I'll certainly be submitting that as an abstract next year. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. &gt;&gt; Thanks Nick. Uh and then just uh on uh Norah's question uh around comm's approach as a an interesting comm's approach as a counterfactual. How how did the how did they land with clinician and managers as as users? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um it's it's a great question. So I was a bit worried at first actually. Um not that long ago. Uh people were quite risk averse to highlighting these issues especially higher up um managers would would would find you can't report on these excess deaths. You know what if the BBC pick it up and we're all under you know screening. Um, so was a little bit uh timorous to to to share it. But actually it's been people have been really accepting of it and they and they've they've they've really they've really uh enjoyed how simple it is. I didn't get a chance to really show it, but there are some other dials and things that you can you can tweak on the uh on the dashboard um that let you kind of change some of the scenarios that that are going through. Um, and I know that some of the people, what I know has happened is there are some people that have been trying to have this argument or tried to like put this this argument forward for for a long time and they've really struggled and they they have used this um, you know, in anger to try and try and say this, you know, this is what's going on and I know that it gets used um for that purpose. So yeah, I would say the the reception of it has been overall very positive. &gt;&gt; That that's that's good to hear. I am conscious of time. Uh but I just wanted to get uh Steven's question in in uh just to finish. So if we can give us a a one minute answer uh on on that maybe Nick um do you have any thoughts on why the the continuous uh flow approach fell out of favor first time around? &gt;&gt; Yeah, thanks Stephen by the way. Really enjoyed both your talks. Um, so yeah. So from my understanding and it'd be great if James was here to talk about this because J is the he's been the one he I think he came up with the idea for the continuous flow and then someone swapped his name out on the document. It was one of those things. Um, but I think what happens is is that the way he explains it is that it's not about it's it's a discipline, right? Uh, and the problem is it's the first if you try and instill a discipline often it only happens when you're already in a serious uh, incident. But the that's not obviously you need the discipline then but what you need to do is maintain that discipline in the quieter times. I think what he says what happens is is that when things get quieter in a very human and nice emotional way the managers and and the panist think oh well we we we can relax a bit we don't have to do such like you know intense scheduling but then the problem is that then like you end up catching you that catches up with you. Um so I think that was why it it sort of fell out in the first place. Uh and also in fairness if you look in the literature out there there have been some other systems that have implemented it and there's mixed reports on whether or not it's effective or not which is one of the big motivations why we want to do our own evaluation and try and uh give give more insight and give give our our you know our our word on that. &gt;&gt; That's great. Thanks uh thanks Nick. Um yeah we're going to have to end things uh there but uh if you have any further questions for Nick please do contact him. You can do that via the the uh site I believe.