to last last speaker of the morning still. Yes, it is still morning which is Rachel Christie. Hello Rachel. How are you doing? &gt;&gt; Hey I'm good, thank you. &gt;&gt; Lovely. So Rachel is a senior population analyst at Northwest London ICB and uh Rachel's going to take us got 15 minutes um so um uh up to lunch so do stick with us um talking about transforming health needs assessments uh reproducible insights for smarter NHS planning. So take it away Rachel. &gt;&gt; Great. Um thank you very much. Hopefully my slides will come up. Yeah, there we go. Um, so yeah, I'm going to talk today a little bit about health needs assessments and how we can sort of utilize data science techniques to really make this data more accessible to kind of a wider audience which hopefully then ultimately increases the number of data decisions make data data driven decisions we're uh making in planning decisions. Um so firstly what is a needs assessment? So this is a systematic report that helps describe the needs for population and with within the NHS we really want that to be report to enable us to understand where we have the need in our population and allocate resources effectively. So meeting the needs um meeting where the needs are. We would also want the report to highlight where we have health inequalities in different outcomes and ultimately sort of drive uh health equity by understanding where we need to target. And because this is an approach that looks at our population rather than our services, we hope that they also can puts more of an emphasis on proactive preventive approaches by thinking of that whole population. So, in Northwest London, uh, we've had a number of needs assessments and I've been in involved in the last two and I've put together kind of a list of things I think makes up a good needs assessment. Um, and I'm just going to talk a few uh through four of those today. Um, that really sort of relate to more of the analytics and data science parts of it. Um and you'll see sort of screenshots of the uh report throughout the slides but also there's a QR code there and the link as well if you want to have go and have a look at the report. So the first thing that I feel is really important for uh creating a great needs assessment is uh having that sort of cornerstone of linked data. So, we're really lucky in Northwest London that we have um our whole system integrated care data warehouse which links uh primary care data to secondary care, mental health, community, adult social care. Um and yeah, as well as some other different data sets that uh like uh EPC certificate and UPRN. And this enables us to start thinking uh about our population as sort of by different characteristics rather than uh by service utilization. So having the link data set also improves the quality of demographic data we have in there. So it all links back to the patient the GP records. We have much better quality deprivation data, ethnicity, age and sex. And that can help us take that population view. So in this example, we've we're looking at our population by long-term condition. So we can take that which is taken from the primary care records and link that to secondary care and see what the impact of those different characteristics are. So here we've got our long-term conditions and their unplanned bed day rate. So we can see some uh like arthrit um heart failure and uh dementia have much higher unplanned bed days whereas something like hypertension has a uh lower unplanned bed day rate but a much higher prevalence. So we can think about what has the biggest impact. So once we've got this really good cornerstone of quality data that uh that's available to us, we now need to organize that data in a way that helps decision makers and non-analysts read it quickly and make decisions about where they need to prioritize and plan. And one of the ways that we've tried to do this whilst also really highlighting uh inequalities is develop a measure um in Northwest London to basically numerically uh identify the variation in inequality across different demographic groups. So we can use this across different demographics but across all different metrics and understand okay where are our biggest inequalities where should we put our focus in for the next year. Um beexian sex is quite a simple measure so it's really just a measure of variation but it takes only statistically meaningful differences um to then assess which one's the variation and bands the uh the number between zero and one. Um so in this example we're looking at long-term conditions and the equity score for those across different deprivation groups. And here this highlights that severe mental illness which is Smi on the graph is the long-term condition with the greatest inequality uh followed by COPD. So this highlights to decision makers is this is the long-term condition where we uh have sort of the greatest potential for prevention because we know this is mostly will be driven by deprivation. And it also means that when we're talking about this population and we're talking about our mental health services, we can understand that actually we're talking about quite a deprived population. And this is really important for um our decision makers and strategists to know. And so then we can take something like the inequality score and combine it together uh with other measures like prevalence, the rate of unplanned bed days. So prevalence is kind of the size of the problem. Unplanned dead bed days I would I sort of consider the impact on the service but also an impact on a population. And we can combine these to create a list of long-term conditions that should be the focus for Northwest London uh for the next one to five years. Um so for example that's diabetes, hypertension, obesity, COPD and heart failure. And this really creates that kind of key framework for how we might prioritize some specific areas. However, um sort of just looking at those specific long-term conditions is only part of the problem. So, another key way to think of a prioritization framework is to use those population segments that we already have within the system and understand that perhaps these different populations need different priorities. So the the sort of long-term conditions uh priorities, you know, fits neatly into the long-term condition group, but the graph at the bottom there shows that actually the greatest percentage of our A&amp;E activity comes from people with long-term conditions um who are under 65. But actually that's closely followed by our healthy population that is under 65. So this is just suggesting that perhaps we need different priorities, different type models of care in these different groups. So now we've got good good data. We've organized it in a way that hopefully is meaningful for prioritization. Now we just need to get people to read the report. And in Northwest London, we've tried to make this report interactive and engaging. um because not everybody likes to just look at a bunch of numbers which obviously is pretty shocking. Um so how we've approached this is by creating uh quartto reports uh through R and using packages like plotly and um leaflet to create these interactive plots and interactive maps. Also having the report as an HTML um allows you to easily click through the report and identify bits that you're interested in. Um and we've published this using GitHub pages which also means that it's much more sharable. You can uh link to a specific part of the report if you want to uh spread that on. And this just gives the report much wider reach and it's much more easier to share. Um and then finally um how something that's important to analyst is making sure this is all reproduc reproducible. Um and this means that we can iterate on the report in future versions. Um so we've done this by sort of all the codes and functions are written in R to consistently calculate the equity index and also um sort of make sure the plots uh look similar and created uh the same and we've also used this uh custom CSS to give the report a sort of a consistent look and I know there was a good talk yesterday about this and how that sort of having that NHS format gives people sort of a a trust in the report and that it's something they're familiar with. Um so finally just some impact and improvements. So um this has been a real sort of starting point for identifying ICB priorities in Northwest London for the next planning. It's a real case for change for addressing inequalities that people can refer back to. And it also allows is a report that allows non NHS partners to understand our decision- making um and they can see how we're trying to understand our population before making decisions. There are lots of improvements to be made. Um this is just where we've got to so far. But I think you know in the future we want this needs assessment to be a place where we bring in some of the more in-depth pieces of analysis together. So more of our sort of predictive and forecasting analytics, thinking about flow between segments. I think also there's probably a need for a bit more of a focus and trying to answer some more specific questions that we need to know about the system. Um, and just a more general uh improved understanding of our different inclusion groups that is not so easily captured by some of the sort of more general data. Um, so yeah, thank you very much. Um, yeah, happy to take some questions. &gt;&gt; Oh, well done Rachel. That was a fascinating conversation and a whole presentation I should and um and I'm all I'm always looking always looking for ways that make decision- making easier. Um and especially around identifying inequality. So much of what policy tends to focus on is on the majority, not on the minority. So, so and it's too easy to go for the 90% than it is for the 10% that's that actually takes more effort, maybe more costly to to to do potentially. Who knows? But, but yeah, I was that's loved loved your presentation. So, thank you. Um, you got two questions that have come up. Um, and I learned on the last one how so um and um and then respond That is a great question. I think there's probably some difference, but I'm not going to try and answer that off the top of my head. Um, the reason we kind of this is developed in one of the hospitals in uh Northwest London. Um, so I've used it here to try and create some consistency and how they've used it is actually on a dashboard. So they now have a dashboard of inequalities. So they can use that to sort of prioritize where to focus. Um I think what might be slightly different is that you can do this across many different demographic groups. So you could use deprivation but you can also look across ethnicity or learning disability. Um but yeah thanks. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I I just realized I didn't we didn't ask put the question out loud and is is the relative equity index you are using identical to the relative index of inequalities? Um and how does as you said you're not you're that on that quite sorry what I'm thinking of is that knowing how things are different or whe why we are using something slightly different to something else is really important isn't it in in um and I think for us in the NHS to either to be consistent in what we use um but recognizing you've also got to meet a local need uh and if that's something that's been developed. That's that's that's going to be um um uh challenging. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So um the Oh. Oh, sorry. Just scrolling down. Um asked, is the code on GitHub? &gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. The attendee chat. &gt;&gt; Um yes, I can I can put a link in to the GitHub uh and share that. Not all of the code because some of it's in the secure data environment. um for Wizix. So maybe some of the more interesting parts unfortunately that's not sharable at the moment but the sort of uh buildup of making the quarter report is available. Lovely. Thank you. Uh because the same question came from Joyce who's looking to create a an ADHD. So um uh your coding. So um thanks very much Rachel. If anybody's interested in contacting Rachel, do uh drop her in using the chat fe the platform. Uh and with that, it's my job to say thank you very much and uh everybody um time for some kicks off again. The afternoon kicks again at 1:20 p.m.