Hello. Um hello. Thank you for your um kind introduction. Yeah, I'm going to start my presentation now, I think. Okay. Um yeah, hello everyone. My name is Shuhili. I'm currently working as a graduate research assistant at University of Exit. And it's really my honor to present my work at the conference. And this work is based on a joint research project during my master study in health data science at exit and I collaborated closely with certus technology and the s uh to savon foundation trust. So for today's talk um I will focus on three main sections. The background information, the development process of our model and the outputs of our model and briefly discuss the implications and limitations. So first for um gastrointestinal endoscopy it is a medical procedure that allows physician to examine the patient's digestive system by inserting a long flexible instrument called endoscope. It includes the lower GI endoscopy that is ins uh inserted through the rectum and the upper GI endoscopy which is done through the throat. NHS and endoscopic services are facing challenges in mounting demine and constraint budget particularly post pandemic. Research has shown that um in the first three months of 2020 uh 20 2021 only 57.9% of um endoscopic services met the urgent cancer weight and even less for the routine and surveillance weight [gasps] also indicated by the um latest diagnostic test. &gt;&gt; Sorry to to interrupt uh you there. Um the the slides on the screen we can see um it's not uh full screen. We can we can kind of see and they don't seem to be moving on. Um &gt;&gt; so now now that's better. That's it. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. &gt;&gt; Let's do that now. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Sorry. &gt;&gt; Sorry. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Um okay. Uh so for the um like in like showing by the latest diagnostic test report like only 28% of patients undergoing under endoscopy services they were still waiting for uh more than six week. So in response to these challenges and demand and capacity modeling has become an essential tool for optimizing resources across various services. So regarding the demand uh versus capacity, there are three main scenarios in endoscopy services. The capacity mismatch problems are commonly observed between the uh lower and upper GI services. For instance, a over provision capacity for the upper GI combined with a underprovision for the lower GI procedures. The optimal situation would be capacity matching demand. To address these problems, the NHS has devel developed a endoscopy demand and capacity planning model for the medium-term demand uh and weight list estimate for the upcoming year in the Excel. And however, there still remains a research gap in the short-term endoscopy services planning. Therefore, our project aims to develop a demand and capacity model for short-term weekly resource planning of the endoscopic services using ordinary differential equations. So for the technical tool, I primarily used Python for coding and sci was employed for the mathematical modeling and the specific mathematical framework I use is called uh compartmental ordinary differential equations. Like a well-known example of this OD model is like the sir model which uh effectively predicts the spread of infectious disease like coid9. So the model um the s model breaks down the infectious populations into susceptible exposed infected and recovered states. We chose this because it perfectly matches our need to track and estimate all state variables at fet time resolutions. So for the first type of modeling I abstracted the actual care pathway from intensive meetings with our clinical team. This is a diagram showing the workflow. So both the upper and lower endoscopic investigations are requested by GP where three main pathways the routine six week referral pathway and the twoe pathway for the uh urgent suspected cancer patients USC patients and those planned uh referral pathway for those who require ongoing surveillance. So next uh patients from the routine and the USC pathway they move into the active waiting list and those from the planned referrals they move into the planned weight list. When their appointments are due patients report to the reception undergo the procedure and they are typically discharged on the same day. During our modeling process, we solely focus on two main procedures uh OGD for esophical gastroinoscopy and colonoscopy. Next, we have conducted uh exploratory data analysis on the operational data collected by the Torby and SEN trust from 2020 to 2024. um as shown in the figure the blue lines are the upper GI uh referrals and the orange are for the lower GI referrals. We can see the routine lower, routine upper and also uh urgent lower referrals were the three um predominant sources. So for the list of weight list we can see that the number of patients on the planned colonoscopy list was the highest especially in 2022 and active colonoscopy and active OGD list they both observed a spike after the pandemic and the plan OGD list was the smallest in size for the activities. uh both OGD and colonoscopy they show a similarly steady increase in the weekly procedures down. So based on our understanding of the care pathway and also the operational data we started to build our model. So we broke down the whole process into interconnected compartment including referrals uh waiting list admission um uh in procedure and discharge. So considering the various uh resource sources of the referrals and different types of weight list we have uh there was a total of like 18 compartment to simulate the realistic fluctuations in the patient referrals. We introduced a seasonality and a stochcastic variable representing both the periodic and the unpredictable fluctuations as our input. And we also uh introduced a carrying capacity constraint on the admission rates to reflect the uh capacity limitation such as theater rooms, personnel, equipment. And we could use this term to cap the admission rates from the weight list to the active procedures upon reaching the maximum capacity. So for the model output, we mainly use the uh the length of the weight list as our primary outcome to measure our model's uh accuracy. So here are the um predictions and the 95 uh% confidence interval from from the multiple runs of our model. So the blue lines are the actual data point and the orange lines are the our forecast. uh we can see the forecasting accuracy is better for the active OGD and planned OGD list and the mean uh absolute errors are relatively small but the model was uh less accurately for predicting the planned colonoscopy list. Another significant feature of our model is uh scenario test. We can change the various parameters of referrals and also capacity compartment to simulate uh what if scenarios. So it can be a powerful tool for strategic planning. Uh after discussion with our clinical team, we have experimented on several practical scenarios including increasing or decreasing the current number of available rooms uh temporarily closing one room for 3 months and modifying the capacity allocation ratio between the uh upper and lower GI procedures and also changing um the referral patterns. I want to show you um the two scenarios that provide some interesting insights. Uh it's like uh modifying the capacity allocation ratio between lower and upper GI procedures while maintaining the uh total capacity levels. This is uh quite important because uh our clinical team they were uh very interested in addressing the capacity mismatch problem that I have mentioned in the beginning. So as usual the blue lines are act the actual data points the orange lines are the baseline scenario and the green ones are the experimented scenarios. when we reduced the uh capacity ratio for lower GI and allocated to the upper GI procedures, we can see a significant increase in both the active and planned colonoscopy list and the peak increase was around like 150 individuals. In contrast, when we reduced the ratio of upper GI and all allocated to lower GI procedures, the increase in both active and planned OGD list were less permanent, resulting in a peak increase about of around like 500 individuals and a much greater decrease in the length of the colonoscopy list. These findings um suggest that the colonoscopy weight list are more sensitivity to the changes in the corresponding capacity uh than the OJD list. This could be helpful for the local trust like indicating a capacity shift in favor of lower GI procedures uh could be like more effectively in addressing the bottleneck problems. So to summarize we have developed a mathematical framework to develop some quantitative insight into weekly real-time uh fluctuations and it's a versatile tool to conduct what is scenarios and for the limitation first is the parameter sensitivity because we have tuned the model based on one local trust. So uh the the generalizability to other settings could be limited without substantial retuning and also we made several simplifications during our modeling such as we we did not consider the ERCP and signoscopy and repositioning rebbooking and patient who did not attend. Uh finally I would like to thank uh thank all my co-authors um Matt, Mark, Charlotte and Joshua for their ex uh excellent expertise and vital intri contributions to to this work and also um thank you all for listening and please contact me further email or linking. Thank you. Yeah, thank you very much uh for for that a really uh interesting uh presentation uh on on your uh model. Um we are at time and I'm I'm conscious it's it's uh the the lunch break. Um so uh if if the the crowd has any has any further questions, please uh feel free to to get in touch uh and uh we can uh uh answer them uh that way. Um so thanks very much again for for that and and all of you that have uh attended uh this