I think that we're all right. So, I'm going to start with the introduction to that. So, um next up we have Ali McAlpine. Um and he is the chief statistician for the Scottish government responsible for ensuring trustworthiness and quality in the use of data across government. He led the Scottish index of multiple deprivation which won multiple awards for connecting statistics with lived experience. Alli is also the co-irector um of ADR Scotland and works to ensure data is used to improve lives and support better policy decisions. Alli is talking about the people behind the data. How stories not dashboards change policy. Please welcome Ali Mccalpine. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. Uh hopefully you can hear me all and let me know if you can't. Um can I start off by declaring what superhero I want to be? Uh thanks for that Samantha. I I I would go with waste coat man. H because I it's my trademark here in Scotland. I always wear a waist coat. It's actually just um to keep me warm. Uh but by but by the time I finish this talk hopefully you know me as the storytelling man and I'm going to describe to you uh why why that's important. I I've uh joined various parts of the conference here today in between other meetings and I I it's a great opportunity because you get you don't get the often in this role to uh focus on one trick and to come and listen to some of the talks over yesterday and today has been absolutely brilliant. What I keep hearing repeatedly, and Ria Davis was doing a a workshop earlier on today, um what I'm hearing is communities of analysts coming together to solve problems. Um and communities solving problems wherever the community is or wherever they are, uh whatever type of community is sometimes those communities need support to solve the problems. But I think as analysts we can help to do that. Uh when I first heard about the theme of this conference, rising to the challenge, I thought that's a conference I want to speak at. Rising to the challenge of using analysis and evidence and research to improve people's lives. That's what I've been doing ever since I became an analyst. Let me take you back to a time before this career that explains why I think my job as chief statistician is not about numbers. It's about people. So, back in the mid 1990s, fresh out of school, I went to university not really knowing what I wanted to do. I tried chemistry, wasn't good at it. I passed quantum chemistry, which was mainly statistics. There was a clue there, but anyway, I dropped out and I became a chef. Um, not [clears throat] a very good one. I described myself as a Poundland Gordon Ramsey. But those were formative years, hard years, too. uh minimum wage had just come in at around £360 an hour and I was on a zero hour contract before that had a name but not before holiday pay was based on uh average hours worked. It was on your contracted hours. So working 50 hours a week with no paid holiday entitlement. When summer holidays came I had to choose take time off to look after my kids or keep working so we could pay the bills. And this was before the credit crunch. The country was enjoying the longest period of economic growth since the war. But not in my street. The choice between paying rent or council tax was real. Meals were chosen based on whether we could afford to turn the oven on. There's a hidden shame to living on or below the bread line. It affects your mental health, your marriage, your relationship with your children. Meanwhile, I saw the council spend millions of pounds in the area that I lived in making the place look good rather than offer the options that were needed for the community. The options that included stopping young people from vandalizing the area as soon as the newspapers had published their pictures with elected officials in front of newly glossed over communities. Years later, I went back to university, became an analyst, and I eventually worked on the Scottish index on multiple deprivation, as was discussed in the introduction there. When we published SIMD in 2016, Fergusley Park was Scotland's most deprived area, as it had been since SIMD began. Fergusely Park, for people who don't know, is an area in Paisley, which is a city just to the west of Glasgow. And there's a lot of deprivation around there. And I met the council leaders who proudly told me that they had invested millions in the housing stock but couldn't understand why it hadn't moved off the number one spot. But our data told a different story. Low income and unemployment were the real drivers. What I recognized was we also needed to get better at describing our statistics. We started working with local charities asking them to better describe the local problems when we published our statistics. I actually made sure that their statist started to work in those deprived communities as well. So the communities could use the data as well. But those charities, they came back to us and gave us testimonies about not being able to replace a broken kettle, which means you can't invite someone in for a cup of tea. That can lead to isolation, loneliness, then to decline in mental health. And all of this matters if you're trying to increase employment because it's a barrier to work and pay mental health in that isolation. Stories like that help me to have conversations that changed thinking. By 2020, Fergusle Park was no longer the most deprived area in Scotland. That's why I care. Because behind every data set is a community and a story and an opportunity to rise to the challenge, change thinking, make a difference. Don't assume that your statistics, evidence, research knows better than the community does itself or what their problems are and what is needed to be done to solve them. Nobody's coming in to tell us as analysts how we're going to fix the problems with our R code or how we're [clears throat] going to implement new uh reproducible analytical pipelities themselves wherever they exist whatever makeup they are they often know the solution to the problems. better than anybody else. So take the communities with you at the publication stage to help you lead analysis into the creation of better policies. Whether that be communities of cancer patients, they will know what they are facing themselves. Fast forward to today, I'm chief statistician for Scotland and here's what I've learned. Data is everywhere. Good analysis helps, but analysis with a good story behind it reshapes thinking. Senior executives want dashboards. Politicians want AI. Everyone wants better data sharing. Meanwhile, statisticians quietly get on with producing and visual statistics. Quietly. I want to stop this. We're embracing new technologies, new ways of working because I want my statisticians to be working less on creating the analysis and working more on communicating our statistics that illuminates better the challenges faced by populations that our statistics describe. I've witnessed firsthand when millions are spent on sticking plasters that ignoring the problems that communities know that they are living with. I want us to rise to the challenge and change that. I see researchers, analysts, and statisticians getting busier, but too often on repetitive or repeating tasks. Automation and AI is not a threat. It's a means to an end. It's a tool, an opportunity to allow us to focus on what matters. Engaging with decision makers, that's what matters. telling compelling stories from our analysis truly reflecting lived experiences. And in an ever increasingly changing political and fiscal environment, collecting the right data matters as well. Poor data leads to poor analysis. Often I ask my statisticians, are we measuring what matters? Our regulators and our politicians agree that we may need to pause or stop some statistics, some research, sometimes discontinuing time series, but where it makes sense to do so, we must. This is an important step if we're to be ready for the future. But it is complex and difficult. It's difficult to stop things and why we now put our statistical managers and those ready for promotion on a leadership program. That's to give them confidence to step up and make those bold changes. Bold changes that are pragmatic and proportionate. And finally, we can learn from the recent past and take that into the future. The public learned what an number was. Why? Because experts rose to the challenge and explained that concept clearly and repeatedly. I want us to rise to the challenge and repeat that with communicating uncertainty in our analysis and our research. Be honest about confidence, but let's explain it in an approachable way. Taking this step can help build trust in our analysis, our research, our official statistics. And trust is the currency of official statistics. This matters because we can't just produce numbers for others to describe. We need to tell the stories as well. We need to speak up, hold truth to power because if we don't, someone else will and they might not care about accuracy, nuance, or may be happy to draw misleading conclusions from our analysis. The theme of this conference is about the future, keeping people in the community preventing illness before it starts. That's not just a health challenge. It's an analytical challenge. is a challenge in telling stories that describes the lived experiences of individuals and communities. So here's my challenge to you. Find the stories within your analysis and the so you might not know what the so-al is. That's okay. But find someone that does and cocreate the story with them with the individual or the community. Help them describe the problem for you in their language like the broken kettle. Think about the [clears throat] future analysis that you want to produce. And if that is going to need to change, think about the other skills you will need to lead that change yourself. Decision makers don't need to understand P values, but they need to understand what the analysis can tell them and what it can't. Find ways to cut through difficult concepts and insights in plain language and of all keep doing [clears throat] what you're doing here today organizations across across communities for analysis starts to lead to real policy positive impacts. When I look back at my own story and the choices between heating and eating, I think about the millions of people facing those choices today. Analysis can solve everything, but it can shine a light on what matters. It can challenge assumptions and it can change lives. So, let's rise to the challenge and describe our analysis so that it is at the heart of the health and care system of the future. Better stories will lead to better decisions which will lead to better lives. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much, Ali. That was a great talk. I think there was lots there in common as well with what Sam was saying around courageousness and around the importance of communication. Um, [snorts] if it's okay with you, we've got some questions. Um, but if you're happy to stick around and answer some of them, right, let me have a look. Let me votes organize them by votes. So, we've got a question here on um how can statisticians and analysts build relationships and trust with community stakeholders to be able to work with them meaningfully? That's a it's a really really good question actually and I think that's part of what I was describing um earlier on which was you know I remember when I first went up to the council and um Scottish index of multiple deprivation that's just the thing that points the finger at where the problem is and and we already know where the problem is and part of going in and explaining no this is the analysis is that helps you to describe in a a a quantifiable way what the problems are that you know that exists already. So I think sometimes just taking the step back and thinking about you know what is it the community needs and how how is what you're doing helping to support them and and I think there's um well there's quite a few things I could say in that one. I think we we're seeing we're seeing in modern society a lot of polarization, a lot of uh diametrically opposed views. Um and I I have no evidence to back this up, but I think there's a thin edge of people who are either racist or are trying to create division, but a lot of people who are living in communities are attracted to that because they don't have any other answers. they don't they don't know what else is happening. I think that then gets echoed quite a lot. And I think one thing and I said it there in the speech is that by working in and what we did again going back to Fergus Park, what we did was we worked with a uh charity who were working in the area and they brought forward that testimony around about the broken kettle and it was just being able to do right to policy makers and I'm much more coherent. Here's the real problem. here's here's the problem that we're trying to fix. Because I think, you know, I I think I'm speaking to people who love data. We we we can go down rabbit holes and talk about technical issues, methodological issues. That doesn't cut through to those communities. So, I think finding those ways, finding people who can maybe help support you to make those stories come to life. Um, and if I've got a bit more time, I would just say I I as chief statistician, you get to meet the the stars of this disal community and I was sitting yesterday with Professor Sir John Curtis. He's a great character, very challenging character, challenges me quite a lot, but we were having lunch yesterday. We were we were talking about it and I think the challenge that he's laying down is how do we make sure that our stat statistics has the gravitas within the decision making within policies. But his his critical thing that he keeps coming back to as well is you've got to make this relatable. And the best way to do that is is describe your statistics in a way that is relatable to individuals who are in those communities that you're describing. I think that that's that's a you know we we are very aligned in our thinking on that. &gt;&gt; Thank you. That's great. I think that that totally makes sense. Um and I guess there's a question there about the next question that I was going to ask is we have plenty of time by the way we have till 20 so lots of time thank you um the next question is about influencing the other way so not about the communities but how do we influence those in power who don't have lived experience it's easy to tell the story to those who get it have lived it and understand &gt;&gt; but what the barrier um that Amanda's finding is that those born into privilege don't want to really see inequality shift as they think it challenges their position of power. &gt;&gt; I think um [clears throat] well Amanda what I would say is if you come up with that answer sooner than I do then please do let me know because it is difficult. I think um I think I I recognize what Amanda says. I what I would say is I lived in a deprived community. I did not come from a deprived background and when um often in what I learned you know living in I won't say where because it's unfair in the council area that I was criticizing there so I'm not going to go into the detail but you know I think those in power are trying to do a good job. I don't think we would disagree with that. I think people want to change society. They want to improve these things. But I think the the point that Amanda's making is yeah quite often and I see that here in Scottish government quite often the people who are coming forward with the solutions are trying to develop those policies they haven't got that lived experience they haven't seen that now I was lucky I know I came from a modest background but I had parents who could help support me go back to university you know I had a safety net and people from deprived areas do not have those safety nets so you know you can't just educate your way out of a problem or somehow you know, take a chance and see what else you could do. [clears throat] Um, and and quite often, I think you end up into that spiral of um poor health, poor mental health, you know, that that ends up in in worklessness and things like that. So, you know, it's it's a quick spiral when you get into that. And I think um trying to communicate that especially with people who have maybe you know 10 15 years of working in this area but they haven't got that background of understanding what the community is facing. It is really tricky to try and get those conversations in there. Um I I I hate to keep repeating myself but I think you know that broken kettle um was was absolutely it was something I could take along. people listen to it and actually sometimes those people further up the tree they like those easy narratives that they can understand because they're busy people as well. Um, and I think if you can distill it down into one or two issues, I think the critical thing for me and and I'm still trying to do this and it's it's hard work, but we need to do it is what is it that's making them tick? What I mean at the moment within, you know, a tightening fiscal um environment, the big thing is how can we be more efficient? How can we be more um cost effective? Can we how can we reduce spending or do something with less resources? Um so I think quite often what we end up now doing is um if I can draw in another example completely different um we've managed to get DWP data into Scotland but that's been absolutely brilliant. The the critical thing is there that we've managed to get people on board because we spend £140 million a year annually on a pupil equity fund. Well, before we had the DWP data there, we were modeling that and the models break down at local environments. So, being able to go along and speak about how you know better data linking that data to the policy impact that will derive a more efficient policy. Now, there's a question mark then on how how well that pol how effective that policy is. But then you're able to go into that con conversation with a lot more uh gravitas because you fixed the problem with is the money actually getting pointed in the right direction in the first place. Now we can effectively evaluate is is that policy working to its fulle. So I think you know it's it there is no easy answer to that Amanda. I think it's a fantastic question and I think it sounds like you you you understand where I'm coming from and you probably know it better than I do as well. But I think it's it like I was saying, you know, the community below or the community, the deprived area that we're working out to understanding what's driving them. I think I think the same message for those senior leaders, what's driving them. &gt;&gt; Thank you. That's a really great nuanced answer, I think, to a to a difficult question. Um, if you're ready for another one, the next is from Julian. Um and we're going to it's about whether there are any plans to make territorial health boards understand why their analysts need more than just Excel and PowerBI and the IG to support it. &gt;&gt; So I think this is a common um uh difficulty shared by many analysts working um in you know in the public sector. It's the difficulty of um access to tools. I know. I know. Um, again, another great question. Julian, if you fix that problem before I do, then please let me know. Answers in a sealed address envelope, please. Um, the I I I think that's right. I think my experience within within um and and I'm not just talking about health boards or or or anything like that but I think across the public sector we've got a lot of skilled civil servants but um there was actually there was a an article I read I think it was in the economist recently which was talking about the data literacy within the civil service and within public servants in general and I it was acknowledging the fact that it's not there. And too often I think what we're seeing and I'm just describing the problem that everybody knows is happening is that you know we've got senior leaders, we've got people who are um not data literate um trying to make data uh sol or bring forward data solutions. And I think part of the problem is you know Microsoft can come along and demonstrate the latest version of PowerBI or or something like that say you know this is isn't this great? I I call it the SNT. It's the shiny new things and executives love S&amp;Ts. Um you know and and sometimes I think I think you're absolutely right. Um we need to think about our code. We need to think about our data infrastructure. we need to think about, you know, if we are going to really demonstrate the value of AI, can we get our data sorted out in the background first? Because, you know, I think I think and it's become a bit of a an issue, I think, because people see AI as a solution, but they don't really think about how you get that AI to work. And at the end of the day, it's just statistics. It's just a statistical model. That is a very clever statistical model. And well done to the people that have that have developed, you know, the transformers in the middle between, you know, what you put in and what it spits out. And, you know, that seems to be the the big driver for CH GBT4. Um, but underneath all of that, you need to have your data right. And if we're going to if we're going to have to get all if we're going to get all of um these new tools that are coming along most working most effectively for us, we need to sort the data out underneath. So I haven't fixed that problem, Julian. I think it is a problem. I think um the more we can do to just you know encourage people to join sign up to you know the UK government ran the one big thing last year which was on data. It's absolutely critical. I think people need to understand that. I think as well if if um and what I'm trying to do at the moment is is bring forward some small solutions that shows how effectively we how effective we can be. And what I'm hoping is that that starts to build into more trust so that next time a senior decides a senior exec decides that they're going to layer in a a new solution or invest 10 million pounds in the thing that you know that's going to absolutely cause you more headaches instead of doing that they'll come to us and say what do you think should happen um is a is a tricky one Julian good question though sorry I didn't answer it &gt;&gt; I think the challenge is it's it's it's so situational and organizational isn't it like it's so different from one to another. &gt;&gt; I Yeah, I I I think that's right. But I think what we can't forget as well that um I was in Dublin recently at an international conference. It's not just happening here. It's happening across the world. It's it's global and these same issues uh keep cropping up and I I going back to that I think that's why this conference is brilliant. I think this is why we all need to take time to get our heads above the parapit, look out, listen to others because we're all sharing these problems in complex problems needs groups to solve them. Groups and communities to solve them. So come together as a group, come together as a community like this. Um genuinely Julian if you let's you know we could have another conversation about that. Let's you know try let's try see what we can do but let's solve it together. Excellent. Thank you. And I think we've got time for one more question if that's all right. Um, so I'm going to share this one from Yosef. Um, given your experience with deprivation data in Scotland, how do you challenge leaders who are uncom who are comfortable with high level indices and heat maps but visibly uncomfortable when confronted with the personal stories that reveal the human cost of those statistics? Um, good question. I I think um so so I was in charge of the Scottish index of multiple deprivation in 2016 and what we did did was we took a a a big 140 page report and instead we we published a 12-page pamphlet um and we started to put some of those stories in because I think it it the the problem is that some of these issues that you're talking about there um you is that they will be hidden within those large publications. think I quite like publications that you know that the problems that we saw you broken kettle I can talk about other other things in that publication as well and you know those personal stories matter I think I think it's quite good when we make people uncomfortable because it makes them sit up and want to take action to do something different so I think um yeah the the the the what you're describing there is that people like to work in the opaque and not have that put up in front of them. I think you're doing the right job when you do that. I I would go to f first um first week that I was in this job as chief statistician. I went and met some some of you might have heard Professor An Glover named Professor Anne Glover. She's um she was doing a talk at a local university that I live nearby. And I went up to her afterwards and said, "I'm just about to take this job up as as chief statistician." and um she said, "Oh, I'll come and have a conversation." The one thing that she's a she's a small woman, but she is a force of nature. She's a big woman and every other stature, you know, she you when she speaks, people listen. It's great. And you you hear all that. That's fantastic. Um but the one thing that she said was never be afraid to use your independence, to use the fact that somebody's put chief in front of my title. that gives me a bit more gravitas in the these conversations as well. But never be afraid to speak the truth to power. And I can't speak for your organization there. But um the one thing that I am doing with my statisticians is saying you know because if you're lower down the ranks you know who listen people that didn't listen to me when I was in the grade below I was before chief statistician don't listen to me. Now they come to me for advice and all that's happened is you know I got lucky in an interview once I think. Um, but what I'm trying to do with the the statisticians and analysts across Scotland as well is say see if you've got something that's really important and nobody's listening to you. Come to me with it. See if I can use my voice. So, I think um just kind of one other aspect to that is just, you know, find somebody who's going to listen to you and is going to be able to echo and support your arguments as well. And if you're not happy doing uncomfortable things, you'll find somebody that is. I am. Amazing. Thank you so much. I really appreciate that. I think so [snorts] much there that really resonates like all the thing about courage, about communication, and about being stronger together. Um, that's all just really awesome. Thank you so much, Alli. really appreciate your time.