So, good afternoon everyone. Um, and thank you for joining this session. Um, we're going to explore a proposition that could impact the way that the NHS uses insight to make strategic decisions and that proposal is the development of a national decision support network. Um, as Chris said, I'm Cla Humble. I'm a managing consultant at the strategy unit and I've been leading the development of this proposal with colleagues both here on the panel and from ICBS in each of the seven regions. I'm going to be chairing the discussion today. Um we've got just under an hour together and lots to talk about. So thank you in advance for your attention and your contributions. Um so I'm going to Mammuda. Are you all right to um bring our panel in please? if by magic. There we go. Brilliant. Thank you. So, um I'm just um going to ask the panel just to quickly introduce themselves. So, um Charles, do you want to go first, please? &gt;&gt; Hi, everyone. I'm Charles Talik. Um I wasn't until September director of analysis at the Health Foundation. Um I'm now at the health of nation doing two days a week um as a senior fellow but I've also been working with Peter and CLA on the idea of a um national decision support network particularly drawing on the work that we've done with our network data labs which I'll talk about bit more about later. &gt;&gt; I'm sorry I'm struggling with my sound a little bit. Um Charles um thanks very much. Peter do you want to go next please? &gt;&gt; Yes. Hello everyone. I'm Pets run, director of the strategy unit. So we we were the kind of initial proposer of this idea but then stayed alongside the development of it &gt;&gt; and Alex. Hi everyone, my name is Alex Ryan and I am the director of strategy and healthcare intelligence and I work in the SUFFK and Northeast Essex integrated care system uh and also have a role with SUFFK public health and much of my role is about translating uh insights from data into uh local strategy. &gt;&gt; Lovely. Thank you very much. And I think we are going to be joined by Jack Fentuk as well. um but he's just um struggling to get in but he'll he'll be joining us as soon as possible. Um so in terms of today's um session we're going to structure the session in three parts. So thinking about why a national decision support is needed, the value and the potential of the proposal and what will make it succeed. I'm going to be um putting a series of questions to our panel and um I will be um giving each panel member a set amount of time. But if we start to drift, I'm going to jump in and and move us on to make sure we cover everything we need to. Um and at the end, we'll leave um time uh for some brief reflections. Um so I'm going to just I can see Jack has um joined us, which is great. Um, so, um, just before I give you a kind of a quick overview of the content in the proposal, I just want to thank everyone who's been involved in this so far. It has truly been an exercise of co-production. So, the original idea may have come from Peter, but ICB colleagues from across the country have brought their expertise and their enthusiasm to um to collaborate and to get us where we are now. And so um we really want to um continue that conversation with you all today. So throughout the session, I'd really like to invite everybody to reflect on what you think about the the the discussion that we're having. I'm going to drop some questions in the chat. Um which you can just reflect on and it would be great if you could drop your thoughts and any questions into the chat as we go on and we'll try and pick some up at the end of the session. But if not, we will absolutely um use this going forward in our um in in the work so far. So I've just dropped a question in the chat there. So that's a question we'd like you to um to think about while we're speaking. Um so I'll just give you a very quick overview of the proposal. So the national vision support network is a collaborative ICBowned model um which is what we're proposing designed to strengthen the analytical capacity and improve strategic decision- making across health and care and we've structured it with bringing together three key components. So the first is local intelligence functions and really ICB intelligence functions should provide that analytical backbone for strategic commissioning. I think what we uh what we've observed so far is the maturity of um intelligence functions across ICBS vary significantly. So a a core role of the the decision support network would be to support their development and provide access to specialist expertise um stuff that can't be maintained across all systems but also to support systems to um to build their capacity as well. Um the second um part would be a collaborative network which brings together the intelligence functions into a managed network um with the aim of reducing duplication and unlocking economies of scale. Um facilitating the open sharing of methods, models, evidence reviews, all those kinds of things. um develop analytical um and leadership capability across systems and provide um a means of identifying and answering questions in common. Questions that everybody is is thinking about but we can try and answer once on behalf of all. Um the final part of the proposal is a national development center and it's proposed that that would be led by the strategy unit but working in partnership with other specialist teams across um health and care and that team would manage the network and ensure methodological rigor deliver shared analytical pro uh products and evaluations provide training all of those kinds of things but I suppose the our aim is quite simple really it's to build a coherent sustainable analytical infrastructure that supports better, more confident decisions across health and care. Um, so yes, so now we're going to hear why this matters and what the potential is um and what we need to do to make it succeed. So we've got an excellent panel. So we're going to I'm going to stop talking now and I'm going to hand over to them. Um, so Jack and Alex, I'm going to come to you both first. So why do you think a national decision support network is needed and what problem are we trying to solve? &gt;&gt; Go for Alex [snorts] have a go first. Um yeah so I think I guess stepping away some of the detail for a we but I think there's there's obviously a lot of policy change across not just NX NHS uh system but kind of public sector more broadly. So you know in NHS we've got 10 year health plans we've got you've also got local government reform alongside that we've got med planning frameworks we've got strategic commissioning frameworks there's loads of stuff happening um and there's a lot of kind of policy noise that that that that's happening it's very difficult at the moment there's a lot of uncertainty and it's kind of difficult to plot a kind of course through that but one thing from our perspectives that I think is a really helpful constant that's running through all of this policy change is the really important role of uh healthcare intelligence. And so I don't think as a community we're in a place where we're having to, you know, try and shout the loudest and kind of demonstrating the value that we're going to have uh in the future. And I think and I think that's great. I think that means there's lots of opportunities there and it means that there's a real kind of opportunity for an elevated role around analytical leadership and kind of impact of data going forward and we can build on all the really good work that's happening across across the country. I think the challenge though is that there might be this elevated role. there might be this greater level of expectation around healthcare intelligence kind of driving strategic commissioning and ICBS for instance but I don't anticipate more resource for that I don't anticipate a great increase in the amount of capacity that's going to be available for us to do that and obviously the wider context from ICBS is we've got the 50% cuts that are happening we've got organizational mergers and we've got kind of CSU's closing which is going to have you know a really significant impact in a quite unequal way across the country. So, I think this the solution really is about going forward, I think it's got to be about how do we as a community be more than the sum of our parts. Um, and and in doing that, how do we kind of be better at doing really good things once where it's appropriate to do it? How do we reduce duplication? How do we share really good work, drive up best, you know, higher standards? um and how do we kind of get behind a kind of as a community this collective vision that we can all buy in and kind of and kind of work work towards. So I think the a national decision support network whether or not that's like kind of the exact right model or or the right like right language I think having a more cohesive analytical community is definitely going to be part of the solution going forward whereby all analytical teams if you're in an RCB a provider a higher commissioner whatever you are really clear on what your value proposition is uh for your team and what your role is within the NHS system uh and what insights and unique value ad it is that you're bringing and I think it's it's quite a simple thing to say but it's not something that I think we're necessarily that good at and there is a lot of duplication uh as I say and actually a lot of this is really just about as a community aligning the way that we are structured very broadly across the country to this new NHS operating model that's been set out in the 10ear health plan. So identify your do wants functions and do them at a national level. At a regional level get better coordinated amongst yourselves at that local and kind of system level really drive forward the insights that you need for strategic commissioning uh and also delivery and start kind of pushing that agenda of the three shifts at that local level. Um so I think that yeah so I think the the proposal I think starts to answer that problem around yeah there's lots of opportunity there's an elevated profile for us but it has to it's going to be done against this backdrop of challenging policy and environment and kind of challenge in terms of capacity. I'll pass to Jack. &gt;&gt; Thank you Alex. So um let's take it as read that I agree with everything Alex said. So I'll try and say some slightly different things. Um so we are at a really fascinating juncture of data technology and opportunity. The NHS is incredibly rich in terms of the data sets that it's got. But in many cases they aren't used to the maximum extent they can be partly because at least in the world of systems it comes from a legacy of clinical commissioning groups where that sort of deep data science skill is not there. as someone that spent most their career in central government, the expectation that you've got people on hand that can do advanced analytics just isn't the same in the NHS. So, the job is helping make sure we make the most of these resources. We've got our integrated data sets, our other data sets. There's also a job to help our boards make better decisions and make sure that in commissioning analysis, they've got support to come up with really strong plans for that work. Evaluation is something the NHS can always be better at and thinking about how we embed evaluation into strategic commissioning is something really valuable in functions can do but equally in Sussex anyway we're developing uh 13 integrated community teams at local level how they get the right insights to deliver what they can do is important and I suppose the final point so um my brief covers um digital data analysis and technology there's something about how we explore and make use of new AI and agent functionalities in a different kind of way. I was at the NHS chief information digital conference last week. I spent a long time talking to Microsoft about what would it really take to use agents to bring automation to strategic commissioning. What would it take? So in two or three years time if I've got to recommission the msk pathway in Sussex, I can say our data is structured in a way that I can ask the question and my initial scoping is done for me. So I don't have to do all the leg work. I think there's huge opportunities to do things differently here and creating a community around how we do better decision- making is really important. It will evolve. This is just the starting point. Thank you &gt;&gt; Jack. And thanks Alex. Um Cla's just had like a technical issues. I think um you can hear that she was slightly delayed from everybody else. So she's gone to restart. Um so we'll carry on with the panel for now but thank you both for addressing that first question. uh and I think we were going to move on to a second element of the DSN uh with Peter and Charles. So uh something around the the value and the potential of the proposition proposition. Um so how would the national DSN actually change the way systems use the intelligence for strategic commissioning? Um and uh either of you can take that first but uh Peter you're off mute anyway. Do you want to jump in first? Um, well, [clears throat] let's let's kind of be realistic. So, the kind of thing we're talking about here can contribute can can help to get to best of breathe analysis on questions they're interested in. But but it possibly can't make the horse drink. So So a really fundamental part of of this network, if if this network happens, a really fundamental part of making it work from my point of view is is securing the genuine deep buy into it from decision makers. Um because we can we can do a load of things to improve the quality potential quality of analytical input to decision making but if the decision- making structures aren't changed then it will continue to have no impact. We we we we are still in an environment where where people decide what they think works and then they go around looking for someone who can produce a report that proves it. and and decent analysis that sometimes suggests that the original idea wasn't a good one just gets dismissed. So we we've got a real challenge to to change the culture. But but the signs for me that that is that but that could happen now. If if we can create the environment where ICBS genuinely focus in on this remitt on how do we best deploy our resources to meet the needs of our population and our individual systems and that's what we're focused on. How do we understand whether what we're doing makes a difference reliably? How do we draw into that quantitive understanding, qualitative understanding? So we're we're how do we champion the use of of patient experience information and patient reported outcomes information. Um if we can get that kind of buy in and and this network can be one of the routes to showing that taking that seriously is the right long-term investment for making strategic commissioning work then then we can make an a difference whether we can fundamentally change it. Um, I always like to start start low and and then and then succeed against uh initial expectations. There's a baseline job of, you know, what are the questions in common that we're all wrestling with. You know, it's a kind of working assumption on my behalf that at the moment we've probably got 40 or 50 analytical teams all trying to answer roughly the same question in some instances, but it' be fascinating to test that out. Where are the examples across the country at the moment of where we've got people who've made an analytical advance that we can all gain from because the idea behind this network isn't that all the gold lies in the hills at the center. The idea behind this network is we've got loads of gold out there. We just don't know. But if we start talking to each other in a structured way and there's one one one I can think of one benefit of the current reorganizations and that is that it it moves the number of organizations to to a number that um that a human can cope with as a as a social network. So we can actually know 26 people or 20 and actually talk to them, start to build a relationship, start to build the trust that probably is necessary to in open sharing and collaboration. So so I think that there's a few things in the air that make it feel to me like this is the right time and that I don't think anyone working in isolation can deliver the kind of brief that is increasingly being described for strategic mission. Analytics has become a specialist area now, but most individual systems will struggle to have within that one team all of the areas of specialization that you really need to succeed. And and yet if we work together, we'll find all those areas of specialization. It'll give us loads of challenges and how free people up to work within other organizations on other people's projects and all that all difficult stuff. But if we're really focused on the prize then then actually this to me to my mind this is a moment of opportunity but we won't do it if we don't have some kind of managed arrangement to bring us together spot these opportunities and do the connecting and that's what lies behind &gt;&gt; sorry Charles &gt;&gt; thanks Peter Charles you want to come in and I'll bring cla back on as well &gt;&gt; yeah I mean like Jack I'm going to say that I agree with everything Peter I think you're right Peter there is a big issue on the um sort of demand side how how it's used analysis the kind of questions that are being being asked and I think you're right we won't um realize the full potential of analysis unless we crack that I suppose one re I mean you you kind of painted some reason for optimism there perhaps another is having something like this could actually show how systems could use analysis really well you know which doesn't mean cracking the demand and supply side I think I of I do often sort of wonder why during the course of my career we have got so much more computing power. We've got so much more data. We've got much better accessibility to data. When I started in civil service 30 years ago, we had very little data. how you know people have got ability to um query data do powerful analysis and yet it sometimes seems to me that our ability to make better decisions hasn't improved that much which has got to point problems on the sort of demand side but I do think there are some big things on the you know this network could help with on the supply side as well so you know I think one of the things again I would observe across my career is that um you know we often focus on the questions which are preoccupying decision makers today but there's not really a focus on the medium and longer term strategic questions. Sometimes the questions we posed today are the questions which are the previous generation was were asking but no one could because you needed the answers by next week. No one started to to try and address them. So I think this the ability to tackle some of these longerterm enduring questions um as you mentioned sort of questions which are just put in the too difficult pile but which probably no one single individual or team could answer but having the brain power and different perspectives and capacity of analyst working across citizen could really help with that and then as you say questions relating to common problems um or issues that ICBS have identified I think they're all all useful um things and good things um I think there's also So that's kind of what they do. There's also how they do it. So you know learning from other ICPs, other analysts, um being having exposing your work to a greater range to to challenge across people. I think a side of a, you know, good analyst is actually subjecting your work to to critique, inviting criticism, inviting um challenge, inviting different perspectives. And I also wonder whether sometimes things could get using this kind of network could get things done more rapidly because you don't aren't constantly having to start from scratch. And then finally um I think there's something on having impact. So I do think the [clears throat] best analysts not only well particularly I guess you know often to start with analysts focus on their technical skills as they become more experienced they will focus more on how to actually achieve influence and impact and I think that's another thing this network could really help with helping people develop those skills and also as I mentioned before providing some examples some models of how this thing could be done really well. Great. Thanks Charles. Um so we talked there a bit about I suppose that kind of the supply side of an analysis. What do we think um this the difference of a decision support network would make would make for those making the decision. So what about the demand for analysis? How could the the network support that? Peter, did you want to come in first? Um well again I'd start relatively simply. Um we we we did a project a couple of years ago. I probably can't remember I mentioned it earlier but but we did I won't say where it was but it was in one of the four nations. um and and they want they wanted us to understand how to make best use of the multiple analytical resource they'd managed to create in lots of so so anyway one of the ways we did it is we went we tried to understand how they understood their analytical system so we said if you were considering a question like this which bit of your analytical system would you go to but what was really interesting about the exercise was in the large majority of instances the person we were talking to said I I never realized an analyst could help me with I didn't realize that's what they did. Um, so when we said to people things like, who would you go to if you were trying to do some assessment? You, you know, you've got a service with six different provider units all with different combinations of resources and you wanted to look analytically at what redistribution of resources between those units might give you a more optimum throughput. And they said, "Oh, analysts don't do that. I would I wouldn't even think to ask analysts that question." Now, not all analysts can do that, but some can. And across the network, we'll have people who can. We'll have the ability to train of people who are interested to know how to do it, who currently can't. Um but anyway, but I think a key thing is to start to raise the sights of decision makers about the types of things that analysts can analysis can help them with, especially if they uh start to develop the ability for greater anticipation such that they ask their questions more than two days ahead of when they got the answers. Because [clears throat] &gt;&gt; I'm not serious in this, but I'd almost propose a rule for a strategic commissioning organization that it never asks an analyst to do anything where it needs the answer more than a year ahead because it's strategic. They want to be thinking big. It ought to want really high quality. I mean, I'm joking about a year, but you know what I mean. A strategic organization should never be asking for an answer to an important question in a few days. You know, an analyst ought to feel brave enough to say no. a lot. We're professionals. We're not going to mess about with that. So anyway, sorry I'm being pocketed, but but to make a point, I I do think that we need to grow a much greater awareness and confidence decision makers about what analysis can help them understand and how to build decision making processes that can draw on it. And I think we can do that better together. And we'll find great examples in local places that we can use to illustrate that this isn't just fantasy. it can be done and I think that that that's me. &gt;&gt; That's great. Thanks, Peter. Charles, did you have anything you wanted to add to that? &gt;&gt; Probably not. Claire, I mean, you know, yeah, probably not. I mean, Peter said, yeah, some really good stuff, I think. So, yeah, nothing really to add. &gt;&gt; Grant. So I think I'd like to to move on now to think about what do we need to do to make a network like this succeed. Um and I think we need to you know we got you know there's there are lots of um challenges I suppose in the chat about the balance around the development of a centralized function and doing things on behalf of others and then the capabilities within systems as well. What do we think the the critical factors are that will determine whether this national network succeeds or not? Um yeah, I'm going to come back to you that one first, I think. Please, &gt;&gt; sorry, did you say me Cla? &gt;&gt; Yes, please. So, yeah, the critical the factors that determine will determine success. Um [clears throat] well I think ownership it we it this won't work if it starts doing thing starts taking on tasks and projects where in reality there's no no base ownership for that amongst the constituents. The network has to be owned by the constituents and it has to be believed in by them actually. Um, you know, some of these types of initiatives in the past have ended up being undermined because people have started to do alternative things with that almost with disregard for the fact that only five minutes ago they'd signed up to do something else. So, so I think we have to kind of buy into it, commit to it. Um to me that would include things like if we're going to create this thing well next time NHS England starts to talk about some kind of analytical development initiative we would hope that the combined voice the constituents would say great we've already got a vehicle for that thanks you've got some resource please pass it through the vehicle we've got which we already own in so it be that type of thing. Um, we've got to make sure we've got people who've got the skills and the understanding and the access to to necessary tools such that we can share better share more confidently share our work. Um and also um I think the network will need to demonstrate right from the beginning that we're not trying to create an ivory tower. When we talk about in this network finding developing the way to do once on behalf of everybody that doesn't mean the central team will do it once on behalf of everybody. It might mean that occasions if that's what everybody agrees, but hopefully in the majority of instances, it might be to say, but look, the team over here in this place have really made advances on this. If we all got behind them and gave them some extra support, they could do it on our behalf. So, so I don't think we should assume it'll go badly wrong if it if it slips into becoming an overly centralized uh thing. That that's not the intention behind it. Um, I just wonder if I could come come in. &gt;&gt; Did you? &gt;&gt; Oh, sorry, Cla. Did you Sorry. Because you were breaking up a bit, so it was hard. I didn't realize you were talking, so I might have been talking over you. &gt;&gt; I carry on, Charles, because we can't. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. So um I think that's all right. &gt;&gt; You know obviously there are some experiences we've had of um networks um you know and what has made them succeed or or not succeed. Um I just quickly like to draw out from the health foundation network data lab. So people might know that that's um it's a collaboration between five local teams and a team at the health foundation. So it's got some similarities. There's a central team. There are these local teams. the local teams are part of this because they actually want to influence decision- making in their localities. If they were just working for the health foundation, that would that wouldn't work at all. Um, and thinking about how that's worked. So, I would say we've had some we in terms of like the topics we've selected to work on with all of them. So, basically the model is we have a topic, we work on it for around a year. Um, a big topic, a topic which no one's tackled before usually because as I've said, you know, it's tricky. You have to do some data linkage. um they're tricky questions and not even sure how you do the analysis. So those kind of questions we've worked very closely with them. There's been quite a long process actually refining these questions and getting making sure they're all questions which um they agree are important. Not everyone has done exactly the same analysis. They've all got slightly different flavors but there is some commonality to them and we've tried to standardize you know we we've worked with them to try and standardize analytical approach. How do you define something like intermediate care for example we did something on um how do you define some of these things um and I think the other thing we've done is tried to you know they as you said Peter they've got different levels of expertise so trying to harness the best and spread it so that we are it feels to me that in that um our network data lab we are actually making use of all the capabilities but I think the message which cuts stands out to me. Two messages. One is I think getting that strong buy into what you're doing is really important. And the second bit, so when we did our evaluation of this, they talked about the real strength of it was bringing together because they were working with their local um decision makers, the analytical, the operational, and the strategic um and bringing those breaking down those silos between them. That was seen as a key part of success. Oh, &gt;&gt; right. Claire, how are you doing? I'm I'm the emergency chair. How are you doing, Claire? &gt;&gt; I think CLA's internet is not good. &gt;&gt; Have you got questions, Chris? &gt;&gt; I do. Yes, I do. &gt;&gt; You carry on then. Yeah, &gt;&gt; I will carry on. Um, so yeah, sorry about this, uh, everybody. Um, so [clears throat] I'm going to, um, I'm just going to bring, um, Alex in here. Um, I just want to, uh, ask about, um, how we can make sure that it's relevant for local ICB owned and relevant to local priorities. There we go. Forget me. Um, yeah. So I think again this the proposition here isn't about one team to do it all. It it it is about like I said before how do you get all your analytical assets across the whole of a system working together with each adding unique value. So this is about how you get an cohesive analytical community across everyone and everyone doing kind of adding their own value. So I think from an ICB perspective this is about knowing where your kind of national center if you like what their focus is going to be on and how that dovetales with yours. So I think that national development center needs to be probably thinking about like Charles said earlier it's really difficult at a local level to get ahead of these big strategic questions. So they should probably be thinking about that uh and probably taking a bit more of a steer on the kind of the national policy agenda and what are the big questions uh we need to be thinking strategically about now and what's the role of data analytics to actually drive the answers to that. I think maybe at that more local level uh ICBN system perhaps it is more around the operational analytics and the clinical analytics of which there is an unbelievable amount of work to do. So I think it's just about kind of making sure you've got that alignment between between the two and and and I think that's where you could avoid this kind of perception of culture of you know more national mandates and and and things like that. I think the challenge as well with the strategic work though is that it can't be too academic. It still needs to be quite grounded in the reality of the sort of questions that people are experiencing at a local level. You know what are the things that I need to know and answer to in order to deliver and commission and deliver our services over the next few years. So it still needs to be that um it needs to be grounded in that context and I think there is a role for an ICB potentially to host that and again that just makes sure that that team is then in that environment in which we are all operating at on a day-to-day basis and get a real sense of what it what does it actually mean to be an analyst delivering delivering kind of system analytics uh today [snorts] um I think there's also buyin that's needed from both stakeholders um in terms of non-analytical stakeholders you know, your local CEOs, you know, what what sort of analysis do they feel that they need that they're not getting now and why? [snorts] But also local chief analysts, what's the analysis that you want you to give your CEOs, but you can't give it to them because you haven't got the resources or the cap the capacity or the capabilities. Again, in particular with some of these bigger strategic questions that we've got got around at the moment, one of the challenges, how do you bring a kind of multid-disciplinary analytical team together to answer them when you know health economists are like hence teeth? You might need an analyst that's got really strong understanding of kind of like NHS finances really good grasp of coding productivity and things like that. You also might need a stats expert. You might need someone who has got a good grasp of systems thinking. You can't always build at a local level, but if you've got your development center, perhaps you can build it there. And then that's again why they should be kind of focused on maybe some of those more bigger strategic questions. And I think just fundamentally it's all about kind of two-way dialogue through this whole network as a whole. So, you know, you got your local ICB leaders who got to be feeding into the agenda for this development center, but this development center's got to be, you know, having two-way conversation with national policy colleagues. So, it's just about how we kind of get this kind of the the communications running through the network and and trying to make sure that we're kind of getting buy in from different levels. &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks. I'll just uh question for Charles, please, on a on a related theme. Uh, how do we build a sustainable analytical workforce that can support this ambition? Are you muted, Charles? &gt;&gt; Sorry. Um, well, fundamentally, we need to attract, develop and retain the kind of staff with the skills we need. And those skills encompass a wide range of different analytical disciplines. Um, not all of which every individual will be able to cover. So, you know, there's going to be advanced modeling, um, use of things like a AI, machine learning, econ economics, evaluation. Um, fundamentally I think it means you know for this kind of work you need people who are curious, critical thinkers interested in kind of getting kind of close to the truth of a of a matter like really understanding it and are able to have communicating influence that might be communicating influence with your manager. It might be with senior decision makers if you're a more senior person. I think that means that um we need to create jobs which are kind of purposeful and worthwhile that people are you know highly motivt often highly motivated they want to make a difference um ensuring that we're making proper use of people's skills so I think we've probably all seen you know we've employed we've recruited top rate analysts thinkers and then we've asked them to produce performance reports or dashboards you know the the kind of skills that people are often operating below what they're capable of, I think, because I don't think we're making full use of them. And then I think creating the right right environment for people to learn so and and to develop. So formal training, but also variety of opportunities to work on different things and ability to learn from others and obviously a network can provide that kind of thing. You know, actually, you know, if you're in an ICB intelligence team, you'll have your colleagues around you, but um you know, they're not massive. So you're going to also benefit from learning from other people other people in the network. I think all of that creates a kind of critical mass um of a more critical mass mass of kind of people with similar interests who can learn from from each other. And as I said the kind of challenge as well because the best way of learning I think is to have your work um sort of looked at reviewed by others and to have had challenge. Certainly that's the way I've learned a lot through my career is having quite a lot of it savagely picked to pieces earlier in my career. Great. Thanks, Charles. So, we got 13 minutes left. I want to leave a bit of time for audience Q&amp;A. So, we're going to go on to final reflections now if that's all right. So, I'll start with you, Peter. Um, if there were one message you'd want ICB leaders to take away about this proposal, what would it be? Um, I I think we need a step change in how we make decisions that are supported by high quality analysis. We're heading into an era where we don't know what to do. The recipe book is not precise for the left shift. We're going to do a lot more experimentation. We need to call it experimentation. We need to bring a whole load of science of experimental disciplines to it. problem formulation, upfront simulation modeling, high quality impact analysis. If we're going to do that, we're going to have a better chance of doing it working together, drawing on the best skills we've got across the network um or or and developing skills with the people we've got because we've got some of the best analysts there are working in the health sector. We don't need to keep going and buy this stuff in. So this gives you a route to the step change you need in a sustainable way at best value. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you very much Peter. Um same question to you Alex. One message you want ICB leaders to take away about the proposal. &gt;&gt; Um similar to be honest I would probably say um we need to start doing things differently and it's not a case of more of the same. So contrary to think some uh contrary I've seen that sort of strategic commission framework just means more and more more and more actually I sort of see it as a license for doing differently. So we just need to kind of build on that. Um but I'd say to them you cannot get away from the fact that this still requires investment. You know if you want good data you want good analyst you still need to invest. And if you're not getting what you want now that might be a reflection of your current level of investment. So have a look at that. And I would then say focus your investment on really good analytical leadership because all of this hands off that. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you very much. Same question to you, Charles. &gt;&gt; And Chris, I think Peter and Alex have said it so well. I'm probably just going to say similar things in in slightly different words. ICBS have obviously got huge responsibilities, enormous responsibilities as strategic commissioners. um and to discharge those responsibilities, they'd need high quality analysis informing informing them. Um I think without this kind of thing and being able to harness the intelligence of a collective network of analysts that will make living up to that that challenge and responsibility really really hard. It's there is so many things that we need to be better at within the health service. you know there are huge pressures the funding to be frank to make the funding balance we need big productivity gains how do you achieve those these are big analytical questions um including questions also about resource allocation as well so these aren't questions I think any one team in an ICB can develop we actually need to harness the kind of um collective capacity across across the country &gt;&gt; excellent thank you very much I shall move on to some questions from the audience. They are coming in. Do uh keep them coming. Um so there's one here. How to get clinicians more involved in the analysis process. The data analysis needs to be clinically relevant and identifying variation outcomes that will be amanable to evidence-based interventions that make a difference to real outcomes. I don't know who wants to take that one. Um well I mean I'll have a go but the um I mean I'd say that much of the most satisfying analytical projects we do um are those where we get the opportunity to work in just the way you've described. So, it's a joy working with a with a clinician who's thinking, who's got a clear sense of what the problem is they want they want to address, who's got access to a network of colleagues that that problem can be tested out on, who's engaged in the process of how you might, for example, build credible assumptions to feed into a model or find critical relevant evidence or or bring in a group of colleagues who can participate in an expert elicitation type thing to to to generate um useful inputs and who can help you think from the outset, keep you keep you honest about why you're doing this. Um um so I mean one of my I don't want to overload the DSM proposal really but but but one of the things I would love to do with the hacker community and the DSM community is to start to identify a group of analytically interested clinicians who want to who want to join in that network to and work alongside because I I I I share with the question for you that that that's going to be in my view a more productive route to finding some of the solutions to the problems we face than chasing down some of the wilder ideas of some of the policy thinkers but Ben. &gt;&gt; Thanks Peter. Any other thoughts on that one before we move on? I I think just very quickly I think again it comes back to that kind of at a local level really focusing on those kind of clinical and operational insights and a lot of it just starts from just asking them what problems they need solved. You know first and foremost analysts should be problem solvers. They're just problem solvers with some pretty good analytical skill set that they can contribute. So it's you know just find out what problems people want solved and then identify the contribution that you can make solving it. Brilliant. Thank you very much. Uh, another question here is, uh, a potential barrier is your own organization's culture to signal their analysts to engage and collaborate with national and centralized networks. This varies greatly between organizations and participation is voluntary. How can this be mitigated? Let me take us for that one. &gt;&gt; I mean, firstly, it's it's correct, isn't it? It's a correct observation. Um, it's completely possible to find yourself working in an organization that that actively discourages you to participate in these types of arrangements. Um, my hope in this instance is that certainly when it comes to the ICBS, they're they're all new. They all happen at this particular point in time to face some very common problems. They're having to rethink what their fundamental purpose is. They're being offered leadership of an agenda where if you go to the evidence, the published evidence. Well, first of all, strategic commissioning is a notion that's been invented within the NHS. You can't find much written about it, but to the extent you can find anyone who's attempted to describe its success, the evidence is not great. So, they've been given a really tough agenda. How do we best allocate resources to meet the needs of our population is is a question that can't be answered technocratically. It's going to push us. If we're going to do it properly, we're going to have to go down all sorts of routes to start engaging with the choices that citizens make, preferences they express, and all of that because they those decisions are value judgments. But we can do lots of great work that can that can feed it. So, I'm hoping there'll be enough of a realization that to to to make a contribution and survive into the future, ICBS are going to have to be move into very different new territory. And and and [clears throat] maybe there'll be enough excitement about that that we can actually find that we've we've got a greater generally a greater willingness to join in and work collaboratively so we can fix this together. um that it's we will never remove all but and maybe if this thing gets good enough, we can start to call out the people who are blocking participation because we can start to generate the evidence that says actually by blocking participation you're you're damaging the interests of your local population. But but I think you know we that's that's a journey isn't it for us to go on. &gt;&gt; I think that's an interesting point. I was going to say something kind of not dissimilar, Peter, because I think the first thing you want to do is to really get people to see the benefits of it. I mean, we, you know, from this conversation, we all think there are benefits. Being able to demonstrate those would be very, very helpful. I think there's also something else which is kind of similar to what you just said at the end which is um you know we actually should like we hold we hold ICBS or ministers department of health hold ICBS to account for achieving you know whatever standards they've set whatever targets they've set we all know that you know okay that's fine like it's good to have outcome targets for those kind of things lots of this stuff is like these targets are can be slightly arbitrary they're really hard people have different circumstances. I think we also need to be holding people to account for using evidence and analysis to inform a decision because not every decision will be right but you can say look we did our best to inform decisions. So I do think holding people to account for running an evidence-based kind of learning health system is an important part of it and actually being part of a network like this would be one way of discharging some of some of that accountability. Obviously it doesn't guarantee results. Doesn't guarantee you're going to be using it in the way we were talking about earlier in terms of the demand for it but I think that would you know that would be a step there. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thanks. Um another question uh about the involvement of local authorities. Will the network include people from local authorities? point. So, so the so the network yes is the short answer when it comes in my view when it comes to the off particularly around training and learning programs and so on where we've tried this in smaller scale in other places a fundamental part of its success has been that it's drawn in analysts from all parts of the system and and in fact when we had a go at it in the Midlands a while back we we we had ADAS as a part of the program and we were doing some specific projects where we we invited ADAS to define the that we all so we ended up doing a whole load of um of systems modeling on on the um doic facility care sector as one of the projects because that was that was what they were but they were interested in the model that explored the market dynamics of different pay rates and locations and so on but but we went with them and and because because they're a part so so I think the answer that's yes but formally speaking the partners to the network would be the ICBS but the ICBS s insist systems where you know I think Ale I mean Alex we need you to talk on this really because I think Alex exemplifies an instance where the intelligence function in if I'm right Alex in your patch is deliberately made up of bringing together the analytical teams from local government provide well anyway you tell it &gt;&gt; yeah no that's fine I think I think um intelligence functions can take lots of different forms across the country and I don't think there is necessarily one size that fits all approach I think you've got to design your approach and your structures based on where you think the kind of the real strengths in your system reside, but also where the energy is going to come from. You know, the funding might come from an ICB, but the energy for it might really come from an acute provider or a local authority. So um and I saw someone had a question about IHOS's you know and and I could see them being part of it but the local model we've adapted is that yes we have a sort of small team of people that operates as the kind of hub of our intelligence function and they sit within the local authority in the ICB but the intelligence function is actually a community of analysts across community mental health providers GP federations so that works for us it might work differently than others but I I I wouldn't see it uh as you It's not I don't don't think this just has to be an NHS an NHS thing. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you very much. Well, I'm going to wrap it up now. We're just pretty much on the coffee break. Uh so, thank you very much to the panelists for a really interesting discussion. Uh apologies to the audience for the slight technical problems we've had. 99.9% of this conference has been great and 01% of it has been glitches. Um but it's been a great time nonetheless. PL has uh wants me to pass on to you that we we will be looking carefully through the questions and the comments you've made and they will be fed into the work going forwards. Uh so please be assured of that. Uh thank you all very much for your participation. Thanks again to the panelists and we are having a break and I should have looked how long the break was before I started talking. We'll be back at quarter to 4.