Excellent. Hi Retesh. Can you hear us all? Okay. &gt;&gt; Yes. All good. &gt;&gt; Excellent. I'll just do a quick intro while your slides are coming up. So, uh, Retesh joins us from NHS Kenton Medway ICB and will be talking to us about the GP resilience matrix, a strategic tool for targeted primary care support. And right on there are the slides. Over to you, Ret. &gt;&gt; Yes. Perfect. Hello everyone. Good morning. I'm Retesh. I'm the lead analyst in population health and strategy team at NHS Kenton Medway and thank you for joining. And today I'll be sharing the GP resilience metrics how we build a high value legacy tool improve to improve flow visibility and decision making in primary care al all through simple analytics. Uh so why does GP resilience matter? So in NHS Kenten Medway and probably in other areas you will see uh the increasing variation in practice resilience specifically around staffing gaps, demand pressures, operational strain or general health outcomes. And we lacked a single reliable way to see which practices were nearing risk or to say at where the tipping point and what the drivers were and whether support was needed early on. decisions were being made on fragmented intel. So from dashboards through local dashboards or national dashboards and general emails and uh local intel. So we needed a shared view that could bring all this together and that that's why the GP resilience was born. So initially we started as a proof of concept few years ago um and in Excel and that that became a success. So people loved it and it did did the job and we had over 40 indicators and I have done many iterations of it on Excel with uh I've tried many mathematical models and uh the scoring methods behind it and we at the end we agreed on the Z score transformation and so but maintaining over 40 indicators through different lenses and different data sources or in Excel was extremely labor intensive and also the users wanted a bit more flexibility, a bit more nicer visuals, a bit more better UIUX and that's where we decided to shift towards PowerBI. We also have a host of PowerBI portfolio tools and dashboards that I users already use. So, it was a good segue in terms of for them to move on from the trusted Excel to the PowerBI version. And this is the quick screenshot of how it looks in Excel. It had fantastic features as well. Obviously not as many as PowerBI. So I'm going to quickly show you. So each practice would be banded in a category. So there are four possible categories. Higher achieving practices, achieving, approaching, review, and review identified. These categories are dependent on the number of triggers each practice attains on the 40 scored indicators. So there are three possible triggers for each indicator. Positive variation, level one, and level two. So positive variation is if a practice is more than 1.5 standard deviations away from the mean of in the desired direction it's classed as a positive variation. Now this uh mean can be NHS Kent NHS Kent Medway which becomes the local benchmark or England which becomes the national benchmark for each indicator. For level one, it's in the negative direction or being minus1 uh to minus 1.5 standard deviation. And level two is anything more than minus 1.5 standard deviation. So only selected few executive decision makers have the flexibility to change the criteria. So they can decide to be a bit more lenient or a bit more strict. And all of this is dynamic. It changes. And you also have the dynamic element of including certain metrics in your scoring which reranks the practices again. So this is based on uh the user on the team they've come from and the improvement program they're doing of uh working on. So to remind this is not a benchmarking tool. This is not a performance management tool. This is only a tool that identifies any practices before they tip over and help them with the support uh bespoke care package. So what was our aim? Our aim was more insight less effort. So improving the UIUX and that just uh reducing the friction between the user and actually making the analytical decision or just the general business decision based of the tool. So having a shared reliable repeatable product that could support early conversations and better flow in support of the term. And how did we approach it? So we ran this as a proper analytical commercial product cycle tool where we use the woodyard approach. So more on the woodyard model uh our colleague Shivan will is presenting a talk on woodyard tomorrow. So I highly recommend all of you to join that 10:40 a.m. So the woodyard model works in collaboration and does not work in terms of uh downstreaming work by passing on one step to the other. So there were clear roles. So there was data visualizations, population health management team and clinical leads. Uh we had product owners, technical owners, all of them doing their bit and that helped us keep on keep on track. And we had weekly check-ins, active group chats in the background, rapid iterations and just not chasing perfection but chasing the right uh insight and the golden truth that can be shared the data side and the scoring engine. So as mentioned earlier we have 40 plus indicators that are scored. These are normalized based on zed scores transformations. In simple terms the zed score transformation is how far away is the data point from the mean in standard deviations. And the mean again can be local or national depending on the indicators we have. And apart from these 40 indicators, we have also various indicators which are not scored which are there for contextual information things like CQC scores, deprivation scores, ethnicity data and uh after after these scores are standardized normalized uh they are color banded into insights and and the users can make decisions based off that. So what does PowerBI enabled? I'm sure most of us have used PowerBI or Tableau or similar tools. you know the beautiful things and powerful things they can do. So a bit more insights you can explore not just beautiful to look at. So interactive filtering we have we have map views which are incredibly powerful. You can see the clusters of emerging concerns and practices at PCN level at SCP level at uh practice level and the users can also see the underlying tables which builds trust and transparency and also reduces any dispute uh from the ground level uh when we approach with the care package further. So this is the PowerBI bit one of the screenshots. So there multiple pages uh many more filters again similar concept we have where we have each practice in a final banding and the ranking score. So this score is basically a priority list for the action taker where if you have a pot of money to go behind uh in an improvement program you can use this to target specifically what which practice to go uh make the call first and you can further drill down the positive variations level one level two and there many other ways you can drill down this dashboard. Moving on to what the users have told. So we did a soft launch and our key stakeholders, key users have uh given us incredibly positive feedback. Thanks uh we we are thankful for that and also given us some constructive feedback which we have implemented and implementing in our next phases. Moving on to what's the impact. So regarding the impact the biggest impact is the earlier visibility. So instead of waiting for issues to escalate uh population health management and clinical leads frame early supportive conversation and shared evidence base. So it frees up my time analyst time and frees up uh less spreadsheet maintenance more interpretation and more value. So we can directly contact the practices help them with the right transformation pack. It could be S96 dees and other other care packages that we have. Moving on to the lessons learned. So the biggest lesson from PowerBI to Excel, uh from Excel to PowerBI, the other way around, we learned that getting the modeling right early on unlocks everything. It makes it a lot easier to implement new new ways of presenting the data or new visualizations that the the users require to make the decisions on a daily basis. So that saves a lot of time, a lot of DAX coding. Uh clear roles, avoid confusions. So it prevents bottlenecks. The woodyard approach for us have worked uh tremendously and it uh it's makes the biggest difference. So it's co-working not just passing down downstream not just passing work downstream. And we needed protected time with the business owners. So helps us keep the reality in check in terms of ground work how how it happens at the GP practice. So that again is a good collaboration. So as the tools will also be used with clinicians and what's next for us and the tool. So we are working towards a bit more custom filters, a bit more automatic refreshes, uh more category level transparation uh transparency and also helping adoption across IC regions. So I've also presented around uh for the southeast region where other ICBs are also interested in this tool. So we are working towards having a collaborative way of working and yes we already planning the next phase. That brings me to the end where I'm happy to take any questions. I'd like to take a moment to thank my colleagues and co-developers Dr. Ash Clint S and Siobhan. And with that I'll take any questions that you may have. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. Thanks Res. Uh we've got a question in the chat. Um but analysts and data teams in room who don't always feel close to decision makers. What's the one practical thing we can start doing tomorrow to have more influence on the changes you've described? &gt;&gt; Yes, that's a good question. That's something I face pretty much every day. So, uh the data does not lie. So, as as I mentioned that there are transparent tables of raw data before being processed. So, that cannot be denied when you're approaching people with decision- making tools. uh if you show them where they rank in terms of their peers and benchmark them against the local and national they unless they unless the data is wrong by itself there's there should not be any more push back further than that &gt;&gt; great and and how do you see analysts and business intelligence teams using the GP resilience matrix in practice dayto-day like is it more of an early warning tool or a planning tool or a bit of both like how how practically are people informing decisions with it &gt;&gt; yes so it's it's a bit of both So as a as an example, so let's say you get a pot of money for improving hypertension or cardio metabolic diseases uh outcomes. So you log on to this tool, you see what practices are in your radar and you see that uh you try to marry other metrics into that. So be it deprivation that helps you rerank your practices and then you can add on to more intel. You have soft intel uh columns where you can see if any other programs are running already on that bit and that that that will help you reframe your resources and optimize it. &gt;&gt; Got it. And and I guess um I'm so I'm impressed you got so much buy in for doing that sort of site level reporting. like have you got any kind of was there was there anything specific you needed to do to get um specific GP surgeries to or providers sorry to um to buy into this or did they kind of just get it when you presented the idea? So this is so I have presented this to the local med uh medical council and also members of parliament. So it's been accepted through them and through them I have bought the uh view and confidence of the GP practices. However, this tool is mainly for the corporate employees where we build the care packages uh for the practices and we approach them uh with with a bespoke solution for them. &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks a lot. Um let's see. I was going to say as well that your uh your your quote more insight less effort feels like something many many people on this on this call can take away and using their using their slide packs. That was a good a good line. Um thanks that was uh super interesting loads of impact again. Um thanks for thanks for questions as well in the chat.