Um Chris is back again to discuss another talk. So Chris Bey, head of data science at the strategy unit. And this time he's going to be talking about whose application is it anyway? Building products for everyone in the UK health and care system. And this time Chris, you have uh 20 minutes including questions. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. Um, so yeah, I think my slides will be appearing momentarily. And there they are. Thank you very much, uh, Claire. Um, right. So, what do I want to talk about? Um, I want to tell you a story. Um, I think a lot of what I want to say really at the moment is just me describing all the various mistakes that I made and the wrong path that I've taken. And this talk will be no exception. Oh, sorry. I just clicked the wrong button there. There's another live mistake there for you. Um so it's a really a story about me ending up in the middle of sort of two things um and feeling a bit lost. Um so I've come from the world of data science that's all of well I've done bits and bobs slightly squiggly career but it's all I can remember it now. Um but some disciplines in digital that I didn't really know much about and have learned uh much on recently. Um so I would say I launched myself in the wrong direction and I've been trying to kind of like recalibrate ever since. Um, as I often say at the beginning of my talks as well, something else that that is um, popping up more and more for me, I'm not an expert in anything I talk about today. So, if you are doing something big and complicated like I'm describing, please don't listen to me. Ask an expert. Um, I'm just telling you about what I found and what I think of it. Um, so as I mentioned earlier today, um, I've been leading a team that built a demand and capacity model, uh, for the new hospital program. Um it's a simulation model that predicts demand for acute care in the sort of 15 year mark about the year 2041. Uh there's a huge amount of analytical work uh on the model around the model in the model you name it. Um and there's an incredible amount of wizzy reports and dashboards and to assist people with understanding their own data to assist with setting parameters to assist with interpreting the results. You know it's the data is complex the results are complex. So we we do a lot of work to try and help people understand um what goes into the model as well as what comes out of it. Um and you know sort of my experience of this really is we kind of did we did what it said on the tin if you like. We did what we were supposed to do. Um but having done that I noticed uh issues. Um I wasn't happy uh with the way that some of the things had rolled out. Um so we did have some user feedback. Um but it was very um it was ad hoc. We didn't really have a formal approach to um talking to users and the prioritization of the developments those users uh desired was also very ad hoc. There was as I say lots of other work going on around the model. Some of which would uh help us build the model. Some of it would be relying on us doing something for you know there's a huge interconnected stream of stuff around this. Um but a lot of it was siloed. A lot of the pros programs of work were siloed from each other. even I mean I'm talking about inside the the unit. Um and so what happened effectively was bug fixes and improvements were considered in isolation. Um and the kind of deliverables the stuff that was rolling out of the factory uh the connection between those things was poorly understood. Um and the effect of that was delays uh and missed opportunities. Um so that was something that I noticed. Um and so I've been as as I mentioned that I've been trying to sort of um correct that ever since. Uh certainly from a from a data science point of view. Um so I basically wanted somebody to just work across all the different streams of work as I say. So there is data science work and there are different streams of data science work and there's other work as well. And I wanted somebody to to consider the work program as a whole uh and to help us to prioritize. And the other thing I really wanted at that time was to to really kind of dig into this this thought about people using the model being users. It it seems like quite a trivial um word really users. Um but I think thinking about them in terms of their expectations, in terms of their user experience, in terms of what they want, what they bring, there's a huge amount of depth to that and it's something that we haven't really done enough thinking about. uh and in particular the needs of people using the model, analysts, you know, not people pressing buttons on a dashboard, analysts thinking about their needs as users. And that I found that was a very important um change in the way that we thought about things. Um so I'm just going to tell someone else's story first because it's such a great story and then I'm going to go back to my own story. Um so and I really love this story for lots of reasons. um it has a real resonance with a with a I think perhaps the most old hory um subject in analytics which is I'm [clears throat] sure you've heard it many times uh we spend all our time building these beautiful dashboards and nobody uses them. I've heard that you know countless times. We all have. Um and so the people involved in this story did something about that and I think um the results that they found were actually I think very profound and they used concepts and ideas which I had never heard of two years ago. Um that concept is what I would call product. Um there's a few well there's a few there's lots of different definitions of the word product um in the world. Here is one I think that's particularly relevant for the current context. I think if I was doing a different talk, I might show a different uh you know definition and um but the thing I really like about this diagram is you can actually see analytics on there. Uh and I think that's kind of what we did actually in the early days with due respect to everybody involved including myself. Um I think there was a business need and I think there was a set of technology that to fulfill that business need and I think we produce a lot of analytics and you know I think a lot of the time that's probably fine. I don't know if you need to contort yourself um every single time you do anything thinking about users but I think in our specific case it became very clear that actually that that yellow circle with design with users with user experience with user interface um in it was really really important and ignoring that um I think had had uh meant that we were shipping a product that that wasn't as good as the one that we could have been. So what what is this what is this word product? I use this word constantly. So project management is about delivering a thing. So you can be agile when you're delivering. You can iterate and you can just be waterfall and just speck it and just roll it out and go right there you go. Um and it's nothing to do with that. Product management is about the why and the what. Um and again feels someone I think it was Emily said this earlier or possibly someone someone in a panel said that sometimes these things can sound quite obvious and they do sound quite obvious. Of course we think about why we're doing what we're doing Chris. Um but actually I think in practice people either don't or don't spend enough time doing it. So that's kind of what I'm what I'm advocating for. So back to this other person's story. Um, [clears throat] basically they were they came in and they were running a team and that team was building a load of PowerBI dashboards and the thing they heard coming into this team was we build loads of great stuff that people ask for and they never use it. Um, and so what they did is they pivoted their work into this product space that I'm talking about. So they generated activity on these five roles uh that you can see on the side here. Product management, product design, developer. Developer is what they were already doing. Everybody used to be a developer. Um but they recognized that as a sort of specific role of the skill set uh user researcher and delivery manager and you know doing those introducing those skills and those concepts had a great effect straight away. Straight away they were hearing um basically they were built they were doing fewer things. This is what another thing I really like about this story. They were doing fewer things which um but those things were better. And I think a lot of the stuff we've heard over the last two days, I think fewer and better, I think I could could be one of my many um things that I need to get tattooed on my body so I don't forget them. Um however um the issue they found was those roles were just kind of given to people uh altogether as a as a as a hodgepodge. Um and the staff reported that their roles were very broad. it was hard to juggle the different responsibilities and also it was hard to to learn and to develop in the way that you want to be. Um so I think another really amazing thing about this story was they under underwent root and branch change of job roles and job descriptions. It wasn't done in a top down way, you know, it was done with the staff who were interested in these roles who wanted to work in these ways who were on board. Um, and they really profoundly changed what each individual got up in the morning and sat at their desk to do. Um, and I think that's really massive. I think that can be really hard. Uh, obviously it shouldn't be done in a top down way. Um, but that worked really really well. People were on board and the work that they produced uh, you know, they had results. Um, so yes, so the work was transformed basically. So now roughly a third of the staff um that are on that team, they all used to just be developers. They were all just the same thing making being PowerBI developers. Onethird of those staff are now involved in in in the disciplines of product product management, design and user research. Um and they don't it's not a third because after you know after that amount of time people kind of give up and you know there's no more engagement. Um they they've they indicated to me that they could do way more product work if they had time. Um there is really really really massive engagement from people who want to work with them to define the why and the what. You know it's been a really really really uh powerful tool for them. So that's someone else's story um which I tell because it is so clear and pure and brilliant and my story is messy and unfinished. Um, but here's what I've been up to and we've been up to. Um, so I have added two product roles uh to my team in the last year. Um, so we're a team of roughly 10 depending on how you count us. Uh, and two of those people are engaged full-time in the disciplines of product. I kind of chip in occasionally. Um, and we've had lots of great results from that. I think it's been really really uh powerful and important and I think it's been recognized as being useful uh both by our customers and by the people who kind of deal with our customers if you like uh and some things we're still working on. Um so I think one of the things that's really been useful uh and that we're still working on is separating this product and delivery. It's very easy to stuff delivery into product roles and that's often what happens. But separating clearly why you're doing this from how you're doing something. Um it's a really spec it's a really specific and clear example this of this is another hory chestnut that you hear from analysts. Involve us at the start. Don't come to us and say I need a line on a spreadsheet or come like what's the question? Um you know so on and so on. Um, and I do think that separating those roles into two brains, I'm a big believer in that. If you if you over full people's roles, they don't know who they're supposed to be. They don't know what they're doing. They don't know what they're supposed to learn or do. So, I think having those, you know, one one product brain and one delivery brain, I think, is a powerful tool. Um, so that's what I'm trying to do. I'm trying to build a group of people who know how to do the why and a group of people who know how to do the how. And I think they they work better separately but together. Um so I just want to talk a little bit. I think agile is a real part of this. So I want to mention um agility. I often talk about agile. I'm a big big fan. Um my biggest reflection on this is that uh you might naively think that I kind of just read about it in a textbook one day and thought, "Oh, I might have a go at that. I'm a data scientist. I feel like I should." Um and if when you look at the stuff that people ask us to do, it's presented to us in a very waterfall like fashion that you know it often seems as though people want us very very clear defined outcome but then when you look at the way they behave they don't want that at all and I mean reflecting on it preparing this talk what why would they why would they want the same thing six months later than they did at the start I actually think when you're thinking about the complex areas that you know all the issues and all the developments and so on it sort of yeah I don't know why that's such a again it feels kind of obvious that actually being a bit light on your feet uh can make the customer happy um so it is a mindset it is a mode of practice um I've had some good discussions recently um this concept in in agile called rituals um and you know they can just be rituals they can be kind of empty meaningless things um And you know, agility is built into everything that you do. Agility is in the code. Agility is in the way that you manage the team. Agility is in the what the team, you know, it's it's a it's shot through. And if this was a different talk, I would wax lyrical for 25 minutes about all the fabulous things you can do with it, but I don't have time. But I wanted to mention I think that's a really important part of allowing to develop the the the the why and the what. because if you don't have an agile delivery system against that why and what you're going to really struggle to uh to you know to change the why to to listen to feedback and it's it's just an important part of that loop. Um so I'm going to shut up a minute. Um I mean this honestly is kind of money for all I kind of that's another reflection I have preparing this talk. This is I wonder if there are any digital people booing at the screen possibly this is old news. everything nothing I've said is is is you know new or interesting or different in any way. Um but this is all news to me. Um so I'm just going around and telling it to everybody. I do think data science and analytics are expanding into digital. Um and I do think that we're reinventing the wheel. Um and but I think in a way that's a good thing. And I actually think we can't use the same exactly the same methods and mindsets that you would use to I don't know build Facebook or you know whatever some sort of digital type product. It's not necessarily true that that would apply to a big simulation model to build a hospital. Um so I think what I would say is the data science analytics for me is entering the max power stage. Um so you know with the tools of data science and the modern products and all this kind of stuff you can you can do things really really really quickly. You can um have millions of rows of data thrown in you know you name it. Um especially with AI power tools it combines on on on itself. Um, but actually you could just be making, you know, if that's not what the users need and it doesn't engage with the, you know, like what they need, what their understanding is, what their all those different things, then it's really um it's really not not a not a worthwhile enterprise. Um, so my final thought basically is um we need to listen and learn. I think I've learned a lot about agile and product um from the in the last two years. Uh I've listened to lots of people who work in digital. Um I don't think we can just port the methods across as they are. Certainly that's not been my experience. Agile doesn't fit neatly into data science in my experience. Please tell me that I'm wrong in the chat. Um so I do think we need to make these methods our own. I think we need to understand them and see how they work for us. Um, and as always, I think I would much rather do it with other people because um, that's what this whole conference is all about and clearly we will go faster and better together than we would on our own. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thanks, Chris. Um, really interesting talk again. U, so we do have a couple of questions. There we go. Come down now. Um, so yeah, the first one I guess quite a practical question. First of all, can you share the JDs for your new roles? But then also, do they do project product delivery management? &gt;&gt; Um, yeah, I don't know about that to be honest. I'm not sure you've I'm worried this is being recorded. I'm not sure the JDs are in a brilliant state actually to be quite honest with you. I think um we're in flux with that. Um, it's something that's certainly something that I'm aiming at. Um, so do correspond with me if you're interested. Um, and I think I'm not saying I've done nothing, but I don't think I can give you like a perfect one that I've written because I haven't. Um, on the kind of project delivery management type stuff, I think my answer to that is yes, they do they do do delivery and project management and that is a bad thing. I am trying to learn to really keep the having these disciplines. As I say, if you go to a digital team, they'd honestly just be yawning in the aisles. Um, they are very different disciplines. Product and delivery are not the same thing. And it doesn't make sense to have the same people do them. It's not the same set of skills. It's not the same teams. It's not the same anything. But I just I I feel like in our context, for some reason, it's it's very easy to to to miss that and to model them together. So that is something I'm working on very much at the moment is trying to kind of um give both those disciplines the respect they deserve basically. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I suppose like a bit of a follow-up question a bit similar. Can you maybe go into a bit more detail on the difference between the product management and the project management? So they seem like sequential actions and stages but can you explain what those some of those key differences are I suppose? &gt;&gt; Yes. Well, thank you for that question because I I I have skipped over it slightly, haven't I? In the interest of time. Um, maybe I should have said less better as I said myself earlier. Um, so I think that the the thing that's really really different about product, I mean, they would work with a project manager. Um, so the the idea with a product is that they would they would define the why and very very specifically in terms of user needs. Um, and that's I think also a language that we're sort of trying to learn how to talk. Um so just to give an example of a user need um it might be um some sort of specific summary uh to do with um like uh a given delivery section of a hospital or something like that. Um it's you know they want to know about something um and that is that is their need. Um and it's very important to kind of separate um and you would look at um you know what their understanding is, what they're bringing to that, what they need um like what they can understand all those different things. Um and that's a very different discipline from actually then doing it. So in terms of like okay well we know what we need how do we do that like where would it live? What computations are involved? What does the output look like? Um but again you know product would feed into that in terms of well what does the output look like mathematically and statistically but could we have product thinking on that in terms of the design of it the layout of it you know how it works does it make sense you know all those sorts of things so it's very much to summarize it is product is why why are we doing this what what's the point of it what need does it fulfill and delivery is is how like what are we actually going to do in the next 3 weeks to go from not having this thing at all to having this thing and having this need be fulfilled. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Um just a quick check of the questions. So I'll just ask one last question for you Chris. So I suppose is is there a risk for those um specific roles like product and project they can get a bit stuck where they are like so career progression I suppose within your team I think so my back to my own team actually nice and it's often a challenge for the project manager in our team to think where they go next within our team because the team is so technical based heavy in terms of data analysis you know analyst senior analyst etc etc whereas the project manager there's nowhere seemingly for them to go do Do you have a similar problem potentially? &gt;&gt; No. And I think that's a great question and this is Yeah, I think this is one of the reasons why I'm talking about this. I just don't think we have careers for these people, do we? I've got product people in my data science team and yeah, I don't know. Product and data science, is that a career? Do we have JDs? Do we have training? It all just seems so new and different &gt;&gt; um that I honestly just kind of feel like I'm almost walking off the side of a cliff, quite honestly. Sure. Um, and the only way we can do anything about that is just by talking about it. And I just I really think I mean we talk so much about valuing technical expertise, don't we? People should be able to get that, you know, but and I agree with that wholeheartly and always have &gt;&gt; but I think there's something else as well. I think actually there are other things that we need to value as well and they can get I think that can get crowded out by the noise about technical. We need to value people who know um to understand users. We need to value people who can manage projects. all this kind of thing and I think again having better roles and responsibilities that's always for me defining the roles and helping people have a clear path forwards um is a big challenge and it's it's a challenge it's not for me to solve this but you know it's for all of us &gt;&gt; yeah very true very true um so that brings us um to the end of your talk Chris so thanks uh very much again um and also &gt;&gt; that brings to me as well to end the session for uh for this part of the session, this part of the conference. Uh so, thank you to Chris, obviously, and also thanks to all of our speakers um today. They've all been uh brilliant. I'm sure you'll all agree. And also, I'll say quick thank you to Claire who's been behind the scenes hosting this and getting people's things on the screen and throwing me into the the conversation when I needed to be. So, I hope you enjoy the rest of Hacker as well, not much of it left now, but I hope you enjoy the rest. I'm sure it'll be very interesting later. And uh thanks for attending and your engagement.