Okay. Yes. And I think I might leave them like that so that I can see them if that's okay. All right. And Okay. All right. And I'll take it from you that people can see them as well. Okay. All right. Um apologies I wasn't able to join properly. Um that tech tripped me up. Um I'll have a second attempt tomorrow for my workshop. Um and I will keep you all on time. I'll keep to 2:30. Um, so I'm I'm I'm sort of hot off the subs bench to present for Matt and I I'm delivering some material which a mix of um some stuff that a couple of people have seen before and Mimuda you can you just confirm that my slides are going through. Okay. Okay. [clears throat] There you go. There you go. Okay. So uh in this bite-sized keynote of 15 minutes or so um title is I wish I was deep instead of macho. point there is and there is a wider point which we kind of pick up in the session tomorrow is how we kind of raise the analyst voice and make it a bit louder and I think a lot of stuff is kind of coming together at the right time but I'm still and you are probably dialed in partly because you believe that we still don't have a proper um analyst voice on every board in the country um so I'm going to illustrate this because you'll have seen a whole load of um slideshows, some of which you will remember and some of which you'll forget. And I'll try to make it kind of as visual as possible uh with some of my favorite films. Um the first one here uh is a kind of logo that we picked up for the chief data analytical officer network which I'm the national chair of which is great fun. Uh we started a couple of years ago. Um and we felt that there was a a space for a sort of professional network for senior analysts. uh notwithstanding all of the great things around it like Apha and Fed IP and what the strategy unit do and the health economics unit and this hacker event itself, we thought it would be useful to have a network of senior analytical folk. Uh and that can be simple things like teams channels. Uh it can be traditional things like an annual event and monthly webinar series. Uh and we have a kind of an active presence on on the AFA website but also through LinkedIn as well. So please kind of give us a follow if you want. Um, whenever I speak these days, I put this slide up uh because that's kind of how I feel uh that um I'm I'm towards the end of the road and what I need to do is kind of clear it for a sort of younger uh ambitious analytical leaders to kind of come along. So I'll say a few things. Uh make of it kind of what you will. Okay. So, um, the one of the first films here, this is a phrase that my wife coined, uh, when we had the FDP letters, which was jolly good fun, as you all remember. Uh, it's always a joy to get called in by your chief exec. Um, who's just had a text from the chief exec of the NHS telling you to be quiet. Um but I think when we coalesed as a um as a professional network and put in what I hope were and still are very quite dry um but objective challenges to the FDP program um we got the response that we needed I'll say as opposed to wanted. um that you the theme of this presentation is what we have to move away from is people kind of sitting in the background hidden behind quite complicated dashboards that people don't really use. Um coming up some quite clever techniques that no one's really aware of and that don't really affect any decisions. And sometimes you have to stick your neck out and say if you are going to deliver um a federation of data at a national level that sounds like a really exciting opportunity. Um but there's a whole load of things that could be done better and I think out of those letters um we've seen some really positive change. So we've seen a road map coming for all of the national commissioning data sets being launched. Uh we've seen the ability introduced of the FDP to export data as opposed to being this kind of black hole that has to hoover up everything and be done in one place all of the time. So that's worked quite well. But that uh is okay if you're if you've got quite a thick skin like me, but is more difficult if you're a younger analyst coming through because sticking your neck out doesn't feel very comfortable when you do it. And it hasn't been fantastically comfortable for me at times, but um I think we're on the side of the angels and we've had a really good response. I'm now on the FDP check and challenge group. Uh we have regular calls with professional leaders in our area. Uh we're hooked into a whole load of stuff around the FDP program. So that's really good. And now we've recently been invited into how this network can support the development of the the single patient record which is really good. Um so what we had with them for example was a challenge where we said okay have you got some data people on this because you know I I haven't been called and they said oh we've spoken to some clinicians and some CIOS and I repeated my question which is have you spoken to anyone that knows anything about data because it isn't those two groups of people um they there is this odd perception that if you have a clinician involved in developing a digital data application it makes it a better one. It might do it might make the user interface slightly easier for the clinician um but it doesn't create fantastic data integration layers level of snowmed CT at the right level and so on. So we are n now nationally hooked into the things that we should be into which is really good. Um, and there's a lot there'll be a lot of conversations in your ICBS and and in ours about data and digital convergence, and they have quite long time scales. You know, what would it be like if we all were on the same EPR uh and the same path and uh everyone was on the FDP and all linked up to the NHS app um and we had GP data flowing with no IG issues and so on. Um, it's really exciting that we're talking about all those things, but they are on a bit of a a bit of a roadmap and you're going to have to have um you're going to have to have chief analytical officers at the center of that. And that's why I I picked a complete unknown as the next film. And if if those of you watched it, I mean, I wasn't going to watch it because I I thought there's no one who could look like Bob Don and sound like him. And incredibly, he looks and sounds exactly the same as it. It's it's it's absolutely amazing. So, I'd recommend it to anyone. And the one of the themes in the film is quite interesting because Joan Ba is kind of an established star. Um, and then Bob Dylan comes along. And it it was quite a nice analogy for me of, you know, all these sort of wally CIOs that we've had for the last 20 or 30 years messing up the huge opportunity to have an integrated donator layer. [clears throat] um and now need to kind of politely just step to the side while the 400 o of people on this call get together and figure out how to link data. The software is kind of by the buy really. Um we the that is not where the time should be spent and it's not where the money should be spent on these huge procurement decisions whether it's buying a big American EPR or you know an FTP solution or whatever it is. The the software is not the key thing. The key thing is a link data set data standards, use of things like snowmed, use of canonical data models and omot mapping and so on. Those are where the time and effort should be spent. And I think we just generally need to be the Bob Dylan and kind of uh Joan got a bit cross in the film because T uh Tim Timothy Shamalet playing Bob Dylan came along and sort of stole her sunlight. Um and I think that's the role that you lot needs to take. Now um the next film uh thanks for sharing which some of you may have seen. Um this is just a a reminder um of from a few years ago the the Goldacre Report. We have to adopt those standards and to proactively share your work. Uh we what we don't need is people creating IP on their own uh locking it down trying to sell it uh trying to protect it and so on. every time you start a piece of analysis, you should be thinking how could I document this so that any other analyst in any other ICB or provider could use it. That is the absolute message to take away from that. Um I'll share these slides after, but there's links there to the Goldacre review, links through to good process like GitHub and so on. Um, one of the issues that we pick up tomorrow is the kind of role of the consultant in all of this and um, you'll have your own views on whether um, that type of consultancy which now runs to about4 billion pounds just say that number again about4 billion pounds across government in this area um, wasn't even known in the select committee hearing. That's the evidence there on the left from um David Nicholson. Um and I do think there is something about how when things get a bit difficult and people say we're not very good at data around here, a phone call goes off to the usual sorts of people. Um there is a role for consultancy but it's got to be very very very specific. Um but to enable that all of you need to um louden your voice at board level and that's having you know fantastic link data brilliant data visualizations getting through the IG um and getting into proper evaluation technique as well so that you have a proper considered respected voice at board level. We need to move away from this kind of infantilizing that we do with management consultancy. Um some of these films are are kind of more my my age than um some of you but I in something that always stuck with me before I worked in the NHS which I've been in not for that long compared to some of you about 15 years I was a doctor foster for 10 years working for a nutcase called Tim Kelsey um who had previously been Sunday Times editor uh claimed to have found Mary Magdalene's remains in France I think um but what worked quite well at Dr. to foster was that we kind of got people's attention and we took something quite complex statistically like a hospital standardized mortality rate um and did did the sophisticated rigorous thing by working with the university with Brian Charman and Paul a and others but we also talked to the patients and talked through through the media that's it about the work that we were doing whether it was Bristol Roy Infirmary or mid staffs or wherever it And if if you haven't seen Glen Glar Glenn Ross, the the meth the model within it is that and the the way to express it is that nothing happens until somebody sells. So to make that relative to your roles that is you can build the best dashboard in the world, no one ever looks at it. It's kind of a waste of time. uh if you haven't got it through onto people's mobiles into their workflow into automated emails in a way that is relevant for them it's kind of a waste of time so nothing happens till somebody sells I would kind of take from that and then the last film uh that we kind of come to um and I think this sort of represents the the really difficult time that everyone is going through at the moment with sort of huge change you I've got a role across an acute provider and an ICP and uh we're you know we've got voluntary redundancy schemes and we've got consult um consultations coming and potentially compulsory redundancy schemes all sorts of things at the same time as a whole load of uh recommended new guidance about what strategic commissioner is how we analyze inequalities data and so on. Um but the the kind of message from this film is and and this scene if people have seen Life for Brian will remember but this scene is towards the end where Brian is carrying his cross to be crucified and they just need to just at that moment actually get up and go on and do it. Um I get a bit um impatient with this type of data which would be from organizations as kind of worthy as the health foundation which is vaguely interesting but not that interesting and isn't particularly actionable. You have to kind of use your data to kind of get up and get out there and do something. Um, and in an example, um, this is some work that we've done, uh, down East Kent where we've used a name profiling tool to look at, um, a particular issue, a maternity issue in this example, in much more detail than the sort of crummy ethnicity data that blows out the census. um because we can look at it at that level and go down into which things are statistically significant, we can then build it into statistical models and actually make a change to how we're running things. So in this example, we took data about people's backgrounds um and their likelihood to DNA an outpatient appointment and not come to an outpatient appointment. Um but instead of just finding that out, we went and created a patient tracking list, developed different strategies for people, um evaluated it and found that we half the DNA rate in the area that we did. So we got up from our desks if metaphorically speaking and kind of went and did something with it. Okay. Um Amuda, I've run through that really quick just because I didn't want to create any more of delay. Um, I'm conscious you've got control of the chat. Um, is there anything you want me to answer while you've got me? Okay. Anal data model. I can say it. Yeah. I I think that's a really good summary. I think the the theme of the um the FDP letters that we did and other conversations have been as providers and ICBS, we send a load of money, a load of money, a load of data into the center the whole time and we very rarely get any of it back. So, at the very least, if we could start having all of that national CDS data flowing back to us so that we could much more easily start to do benchmarking and all sorts of things, I think that'd be really good. I think what happens um the one of the answer one of the the next bit of the answer to that question is that when these Wally CIOS go out and procure systems they have no thought for how we organize the data below them. So if people like on this call could be in the room going can we just make sure that when we buy the new theater system it adheres to the national theater can cononical theat's cononical data model that would at least be a start. Um at the moment what you have is um IT departments and suppliers going well we're standing up this new pass system. We'll just call the wards ABC and then people on this call are going well they're not called ABC they're called 123 and if you call them 123 that makes possible all of this other data linkage over there. So the the colonical data model isn't the answer to everything but it is absolutely a an example of how the principle should be done which is that everybody should record data in the same way in the same structure acknowledging that there will be local instances you know one of the things that we'll talk about at our CDIO conference next year is left shift everyone's going we're going to left shift that all sounds great there's no data over there so start and think about what canonical data model might be for you know third sector um commissioning data sets is quite interesting. So I think it's I think it's an example of something that adheres to our principles acknowledging that there'll always be some you know clinical data for example that is beyond a cononical data model. Um, I've got to unmute in two places, I've realized, so people didn't actually hear my my uh little blip there. U, but thank you so much, Mark. Um, not least because um, the last time I heard this, I know you you recommended lots of movies, so now I've actually got the full list now, which I can take away. Um, but re really thank you for putting up with the tech as well and persevering with it. you deserve a medal just for your patience with it and carrying on and uh I know you've come in last minute as well which we really appreciate. Uh but we're hearing again from you tomorrow and you're back with more aren't you? &gt;&gt; Um so we look forward to that. So &gt;&gt; please do people join us back for that p panel session and more from Mark and others tomorrow. Uh but thank you Mark. I'm going to stop sharing now so that um we can carry on with the rest of the program but hopefully we can get you back on to actually join us for more uh this afternoon as well. Thank you, Mark.