Um, and delighted to welcome Rob Dabs and Izzy Web from the Dorset Intelligence and Insight Service who are going to be actually building on sort of some of the the discussion that we've had, but but looking at datadriven winter support for older people across an IC. And Rob and Izzy, I can see you on screen. Welcome. I shall hand over to you. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you. Um, good afternoon everyone. Um, I'm Rob Dabs, the deputy head of analytics with the Dorset Intelligence and Insight Service and my colleague, &gt;&gt; Hi, I'm Izzy Webb. I'm a lead business intelligence partner um, also working with the DICE. &gt;&gt; And I suppose the the purpose of today is fairly straightforward. We want to show you the value of intelligence when it's applied with intent, empathy, and collaboration, and how that enables the system to shift care closer to the community in a way that's proactive, preventative, and measurable. We're going to start by giving you a clear overview of the DICE team, who we are, and how we work. And then we're going to bring it to life and show you DICE in action. A practical example where intelligence has generated realworld impact. And this is the magic of DICE. Transforming data into actionable insight that genuinely changes people's lives. And we'll dive straight into an overview of the DICE team. &gt;&gt; Um so what is DICE? Obviously, as we've said, it stands for the Dorset Intelligence and Insight Service. Um, but we are a dedicated data engineering, analytical, and data science team of specialists. Um, who all work together with our partners across the entire Dorset Integrated Care System. Um, we also work with our local Wessex Cancer Alliance and other organizations across the south of England to create meaningful cross system insights and analytics. We host a lot of our outputs in a secure online platform which brings together an array of insights and tools um enabling our teams to make the best decisions for their populations. Um we provide a really holistic overview of the whole Dorset population linking and connecting data together to really drive uncovering new insights. Um and as I said I'll come on to describing sort of how we do that and who we work with. Um, so how does the DICE do this is probably a question I think that would immediately be on your mind. Kind of this isn't an easy thing to have done. So, so how do we really turn the data that we've got into that kind of actionable intelligence? It all starts with codees. This is a really fundamental first key step for us. We work really closely with our partners, whether that be clinicians, operational managers, um people from, you know, a variety of different organizations, whether that be the voluntary and community sector or local authorities. And then we really goes design it so that we can build a really strong data foundation. We move then into more of the technical building the data and infrastructure that can host some of this reporting product, these reporting products. Um, alongside all of this, we have some really clear, um, you know, trust and governance procedures that allow us to be able to use the data in the ways that we do to be able to combine it, to be able to link it together and really get that holistic overview, but using information governance as an enabler rather than where it can often become, you know, that blocker. we've been able to really use it to help us uncover really good insights and build good tech solutions that um we can use to deliver insights um through a variety of products. So um one of our main reporting tools is PowerBI um but we will also build kind of analytical papers um PowerPoint presentations talk about analysis. So it kind of our product depends and fits the needs of um whatever's kind of set out in that kind of co-design step. Then we use that to really drive action and impact. And that's the really exciting bit. I think that's the part that a lot of us will get really excited about is kind of what can change um in a person's experience of the health and care system, but something that's been driven by data and genuinely being informed from that data that we hold. Um I mentioned a little bit that we work right across our integrated care system. So on this slide here you can see um examples of some of the different types of organization we'll work with. So we we have two acute trusts um endorset. We work across both of those. We have our community health care provider. Um we connect together all of our primary care um GP um practices data um stretch across into our local authority, our ambulance service. We really are collaborating and bringing together and breaking down those organizational boundaries to connect the data, bring it all into dice, make it about person and start to be able to see where the same person is touching multiple parts of the entire health and social care system. This genuinely stretches broader than the NHS though we are an NHS hosted team. Um what we then therefore can create is a really federated data and intelligence platform. um that's really securely connecting that data across the whole draw set. I'm gonna hand over to Rob for this one. Thanks Izzy. And this slide is just to give you a sense of the breadth of insight that we provide as a DICE team across the system. It spans the whole patient pathway. So from understanding our population, analyzing conditions and interventions and then through to monitoring the activity and impact that we deliver. Um and it's an approach we've adopted as part of the financially vulnerable pensioners work that we're going to cover with Dyson action. So identifying the population the cohort we look at using linked health and care and wide deter determinance data sets to identify those that are most vulnerable and then we holistically look at the the conditions of that cohort of individuals. by understanding what conditions they have and then we can start to plan the targeted interventions to support that cohort of patients um and making sure they're receiving the right care in the right place at the right time. And then finally, it's how we track the activity and measure the impact that we've delivered from those interventions. So these four pillars um give Dorset a really comprehensive and joined up understanding of our population and how people interact with our services. And it allows DICE to genuinely support the shift to prevention and community based care which is fundamentally making care more convenient. And next please Izzy. So now we're going to talk specifically about DICE in action. So th this is a project um that we have delivered over the last sort of 15 months and it's focused predominantly on targeted winter support for financially vulnerable pensioners in Dorset. And the aim of this product uh project was to identify those vulnerable people who are at greater risk during the winter months and that's due to health, financial or social vulnerabilities. And by using that linked data set across the Dorset system, we we've been able to proactively pinpoint exactly where people need support and intervene um and ultimately make a difference. So I'm going to cover the why or why this project and um fundamentally last winter national changes meant the pension credit allegibility significantly reduced the number of older residents who qualified for the automatic financial support and as a result many pensioners who were already living within the margins it became harder for them to make sure they were getting the appropriate care and services. So at the same time, we know cold weather exacerbates health conditions. So we were trying to avoid that additional demand for primary care community and secondary care colleagues. And what this did, we identified one in five pensioners were exposed to being financially vulnerable last winter. So, approximately 44,000 residents within the Dorset uh system. And what we were trying to do is develop a targeted intelligence-led approach so that we could proactively identify residents who required additional support and we were trying to intervene to prevent those crisis from taking place. &gt;&gt; And I'll hand back to Izzy. So I'm going to come on a little bit to describe um the challenge for this project. Um so we started out by trying to kind of understand the risk. So what was the scale of um you know residents and people that maybe needed some extra support last winter. So we looked at the previous winter so looking at 2023 and found that um as Rob was saying about 200,000 people in Dorset would have received a winter fuel payment and that year there was an additional cost of living payment. Um when we were looking in 2024, it was expected that actually only 20,000 of those people would be in receipt of pension credit and therefore eligible for the winter fuel payment. We were able to use some of our other data sets to start to estimate a potential gap because obviously, you know, not everyone that's a Dorset pensioner would need that extra um level of funding and support, but there are definitely more people than 20,000 that do. Um, so we were able to estimate that there was 44,000 people at risk of being financially vulnerable. Clearly presenting a gap. You know, there's people that we don't know about that don't already have access to to the either pension credit or and or winter fuel payment. So, actually, how can we go about some more targeted um, you know, outreach and campaigns to be able to, you know, provide support if people are entitled to it or or need it. Um, we also had a bit of a look at this cohort of 44,000 people to see if we could understand, you know, what long-term health conditions are they managing. Um, and so we found that the these are the top kind of eight long-term health conditions of the Dorset pensioners um who are at risk of financial vulnerability. So these won't be, you know, necessarily as a surprise to you, but we then through our research started to look and see actually are some of these conditions more adversely impacted by exposure to cold weather. You know, if somebody can't heat their home, is it likely that some of these um conditions, you know, could be exacerbated by that exposure to cold weather? And again, we found that six out of eight of these top conditions, you know, could be that there's health impacts to not being able to be somewhere warm over winter. Um, so I'm going to next describe our approach. So, as we referenced kind of at the beginning of the presentation, we went set about kind of bringing together all of our data sets um to be able to to be more specific about this cohort of individuals. So, we brought together our kind of traditional NHS data sets where we could understand things about people like as I said their number of long-term health conditions, what those long-term health conditions are, how old are they, um what were their interactions with certain health services, so in the hospital A&amp;E, um and GP appointments, how did that look? And then the next bit that was really crucial was being able to tie up with our local authority colleagues. That was how we were able to begin to assess far more of people's risk. Um they had access to a Mosaic data set, Mosaic Experian data set. Um which was able to flag if people were at risk of financial vulnerability and being able to really connect that into the other health data that we had kind of unlocked the ability to do what happened next. We were also able to see where people are in terms of their location across the county um and whether they are actually already known to adult social care. you know, do they already have an interaction with the local authority? Is there more that could be done with that relationship, often a trusted relationship, um to improve the level of support that they had last winter? What that then led to was um an ambition to be able to do some more targeted interventions in specific high-risk communities across Dorset. This wasn't necessarily needed across the whole county, but actually is there pockets where there's a high concentration of people where we could do more. Um and then our data also allows us to be quite individual in this. So we could identify individuals with cold sensitive conditions um and potentially you know invite them invite them along to certain events and things. could hand back to Rob for our objectives. &gt;&gt; And I I suppose what we we set out to do was to create that sort of focused intelligenceled response. And some of our key objectives were around ensuring we identify the right pensioners that are at risk, prioritizing those um with medical conditions that are exacerbated by the cold and then deliver timely interventions. And I think rather than spreading support thinly, what we tried to do is use the data to pinpoint exactly where these residents were located within Dorset. And then what we did is go down further to understand where the high concentration of residents reside within the um LSAs within the Dorset area. Um and a big part of this was about messaging. So ensuring that the collaboration and the relationships were built between each partner within the integrated care system so that people and organizations weren't working in silos but they were looking at this as a coordinated offer on the ground and that included our local authorities offering additional household support fund letters to these particular cohorts of patients. It meant secondary care could reidentify them and potentially prioritize them if they were on a waiting list and we also had the support of the of the private sector as well. So for example, Wessix Water were then being able to contact their customers and ensuring they knew that additional financial support was available to them. So it was a really collaborative effort across the the the whole of Dorset. And ultimately the aim wasn't just about activity. It was about trying to demonstrate a real shift in outcomes over that winter period. And we wanted to demonstrate through the use of intelligence how targeted intervention can genuinely reduce the pressure of an already overstretched system. And I'll now hand over to Izzy who's going to explain the how. &gt;&gt; Um, so as I said, we connected up our data sets from across different system partners. Um, we then presented them or made them accessible via a single page PowerBI report. This is a screenshot of the tool. Um, which allowed kind of all the interactive filtering that you would expect from a PowerBI report. Um, but it also meant that, you know, we've got two local authority areas. they could be very targeted in how they use this and look at kind of their relevant um populations through using kind of the filters and things in in this report. It's all hosted on our secure platform. So, you know, people only had access to it if they needed to have access to it. Um and we also developed or delivered our insights in an accompanying um analytical paper um which pulled together far more of the kind of research we' done that I alluded to earlier on and drew out some more of the kind of themes for some deeper analysis. Um but this was the tool of kind of how the teams operationally could go and you know do more with this data. Um it also allowed for an element of reidentification which again for the right people that was not a functionality that everyone needed nor had um but for the right people for example in primary care they could go in I'd reidentify people that are within their GP surgery um and do more of that very specific targeted outreach um to known individuals at risk. Um we when we set out the project proposed kind of four main um interventions or recommendations. One being that very true datadriven targeting um being able to use kind of the insights generated by DICE to map the financial vulnerability and health conditions. Um the second being to encourage those collaborative efforts um that Rob was describing there where we were really engaging across different system partners, GPS, social prescribers, adult social care, all really coming together and as I said using that reidentification functionality in DICE. There was also an element of actually just increasing awareness of the spaces that we have on offer across the county. For example, libraries, etc. where there's kind of warm spaces that um people can go to kind of keep warm um throughout the winter months. And then we also set out to potentially expand on some more remote monitoring, so utilizing internet of things sensors. Um when we then come to outcomes, um we didn't manage to achieve all four of those, but we did manage to achieve some really magic stuff. Um so we were able to offer that proactive outreach to a wide range of um individuals. So whether that's at that individual targeted level or specific communities, that's absolutely something that happened and continues to happen um since we sort of started the project. We to enable that connecting where we've described a few times through the presentation a connecting of services um we established a half hourly fortnightly meeting which doesn't really sound like a lot when I say it like that but actually it was pivotal to connecting people. It was it was a meeting that doesn't have an agenda. People could just come and describe what they were seeing from their services. So these were um voluntary and community sector partners. Um for example, AUK, I've sort of seen them mentioned in the chat. Our local AUK representatives came to that meeting. um other local charity organizations, our acute trusts were represented, local authorities, the GP alliance was represented at that meeting and also Wessix Water, um a local local housing um association was there. So, we were really starting again to break down those organizational boundaries and it's in those meetings that magic happened. People made connections of well, my service is doing that over there for trying to offer that to those people. Actually, could we do something far more together? Help and care were there too. Seen them come up in the chat there as well. Yeah, help and care were also represented. So, it genuinely was a meeting where people could just come together and share, share what they were seeing, share what was going on. Um, and also it very quickly became apparent these people all had access to so many resources. So, we created a central place where they could be um hosted, whether that was um energy um efficiency booklets to help heat proof your home. The scope of this really spread. Um, and we also worked actually with the Dorset Police Service. So, we were able to also include messaging around preventing fraud. Not something we at all set out with at the at the outset of this project, but actually very quickly became apparent that it it could support people who were at risk of financial vulnerability, if we could also support them not being taken advantage of with fraudulent activity. Um, we did evaluate the project back in around May time. um and have continued kind of the these connections and meetings and things and we're able to see a small reduction in the average number of primary care visits of this cohort of people. Um we did acknowledge within that evaluation that a year is actually quite a short length of time to be able to see the kind of system level changes that we would hope for. Um but we plan to kind of repeat that in the next few years to be able to monitor and see if we can start to see some more of those changes. Um, I'm going to stop there, but we are happy to take questions. &gt;&gt; Oh, that's brilliant. Thank you very much, Rob and Izzy. Absolutely fascinating and and you can see from the chat, it's generated lots of interest and you've kept beautifully to time. So, we do have time for probably a couple of questions. I'm going to pick up the one that was posted early on or perhaps combine a couple. There was a question about the sort of co-design versus co-production and to what extent patients carers were involved in that um in that process. Don't know who wants to feel that one. &gt;&gt; Yeah, of course. So, as part of the DICE process, we're talking about the the technical process of co-designing the data specifications, ensuring we're collecting the right data from each of the organizations, which is firmly in the the co-design aspect. Whereas your co-production would be delivered in your interventions and that's when we brought in primary care partners, local organizations, voluntary and community sector to really help us co-design but what can we actually be doing on the ground to make a difference and that's where Izzy mentioned those sparks were generated and and we had charities going well actually we host a weekly forum why don't we invite people there and it was brilliant to see that happen organically you know without any structure. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Brilliant. Really great demonstration of that collaborative working. Izzy, I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. &gt;&gt; Um I'm happy to add that I and I should have said this actually in the presentation. We also did a sort of survey as part of our evaluation um of our system partners because you know it's not Rob and I that are going out and actually able to talk to to or having those regular interactions with patients and carers and residents and things. actually that's just not um a routine part of our roles. We absolutely can do that but actually there are better placed colleagues who have that as part and parcel of their roles who are already doing that. So we sort of surveyed the partners of of the group um to understand how they were how their experience had been of connecting in this way and there was some really powerful things that came through that of they'd actually seen you know firsthand where we were able to kind of get there sooner and prevent a fall or put some support in place that meant that we would we were getting there that bit earlier rather than waiting for a crisis to happen um and then kind of you know picking up with the health service the repercussions of that. So I think that's what I'd add. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Brilliant. Thank you. We've probably got time for well I'll combine two um questions. There's a question about sort of how did you assess people's risk of finan being financially vulnerable and I don't know whether you can also pick up the question about whether there were people that you were missing that that that were appearing in in the the link data that you had. &gt;&gt; Do you want me to go for that one? Um so in terms of the assessment it was very much you know we we use this this extra kind of data set and had a look at that but again it's only sometimes through when you start to use this data that you start to uncover where there might be you know potential gaps ways of doing things better so I suppose we started with what we had um but we were then very quickly able to do you know that comparison of are these people known to um health and social care services if not why not um and start to again sort of find those those gaps in the data. So, I'm not going to stand here and say that we caught every person that, you know, should be perhaps recorded as as having a risk of financial vulnerability, but actually through genuinely moving forward and starting to try and use some of this data and anger, I absolutely think we've improved it going forward. And I I think there just momentum that can be gained from starting. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thanks. And and Rob, was there anything that you wanted to add? Ju just finally I suppose is um I'm happy to share that the DICE generic inbox we we do have like the evaluation impact report available. We have the analysis report that we initially presented to the integrated care partnership board. So we we've got all of the analytical products if you would like and we'd be more than happy to share them. I know there was a question about uh data sharing as well. Um so Dorset we're really fortunate that primary care all use system one um and we've got quite a comprehensive data sharing agreement in place across all partners which enables us to to share that data securely. So yeah I'll pop the dice email in the chat and please feel free to reach out. &gt;&gt; I think that's brilliant. Clearly we didn't get through all of the questions in the chat and it's uh we could have spent a lot more uh time uh exploring uh the the work but we we will have to move on. So thank you Rob and I is really fantastic.