Okay, thank you Jonathan. So yeah, good to have you everyone. This is a project which we're using adult social care data to try and understand um people's transitions between different kinds of care packages and we're hoping that would be useful for planning future adult social care provisions. So I'd like to thank my colleagues at Cheyenne and Avashi from Brent Council. And um yeah, if there's any time at the end, I'll answer questions, but do feel free to pop them in the chat as we go along. So, uh we've got an annual spend of about 90 million pounds in um for care at home and about 38 million pounds on residential care each year within um rent, adult social care. And the new requests for support have been rising each year about 5%. While the majority of adult social care users are 65 and over, the growth is actually most rapid in the working age population. So we wanted to do this work to try and answer a few questions. What kind of care provision is going to be needed in the future in Brent? For example, how many care home are we going to need? And how long are users staying in different kinds of care packages? And what does that look like for different segments of the population? And hopefully this is going to help us understand maybe what proactive or preventative measures we can take to um prevent people from escalating into more intensive kinds of care. And then um yeah is a multi-state model useful method here. This is a new method for us. So we're um I suppose trying it out rather than claiming to be experts. So the data we've got is um all Brent adult social care clients at some point between January 2020 and December 24 and we used a fantastic resource which is the whole systems integrated care data resource um which has got records from over 2.4 million patients in northwest London. Um so that's linked GP data, hospital data, some community data, and some social care data. And we use the deidentified um patient level version of the data set. So we've got four states that we've modeled. Um care at home, which includes like low-level packages, um extra care, and then supported living. We've got residential care, which includes residential and nursing care. We've got um people that are not currently adult social care users. So they might have no care or they might be um receiving just informal and paid care. They might be selfunders or they might be getting the NHS continuing health care. And so people are allowed to transition in either direction between those three states. And then there's the fourth state which is um disease. So yeah, as I say, we've got the longitudinal individual level data and we're using that to see how many transitions people make between between different states. Um, so we've taken the state um the last known state for that year is taken as the state for the whole year. So we're not we're ignoring any sort of within year transitions and we use the R package MSM to do the modeling. So that's a package that um assumes that the current state the transition depends only on the current state um and various other assumptions that I'll describe at the end. So far we've only included demographic coariants. So we've got um gender age deprivation and ethnicity. We had a few challenges with the models not converging. So we've had to only include ethnicity as um as very broad categories and only age in two groups. So we've got about 7,000 adults with the complete data. Um about two in three are age 65 and over and um slightly more are female. We know that um people from black ethnic groups and from deprived areas tend to be over represented in adult social care compared with the census. And we also know that our older clients uh live in slightly less deprived areas compared with our younger clients. So there were about 26,800 transitions um over the 5 years of followup. So um at baseline there were about 5,000 people that were not receiving a package, about 1,500 people that were receiving care at home and about 500 in residential care. And then this is the table that's showing what the transition probabilities look like over 10 years. So you observe it for five years and then the model um predicts the the following five years. So just to explain what this means, if you take the um care at home group for example, so it at baseline they're receiving a care package in their own home. 42% of them are not receiving any care at year 10. 22% are still receiving care at home. 4% have moved into residential care and 32% have died during the 10-year follow-up. Sorry, I should have got some myself some water. And then we've gone on to look at um the demographics that are associated with each of those transitions. So first of all, thinking about making a move to a more intensive care package. So moving from not in social care to care at home. And you can see that this is more likely for um so things to the right hand side mean that those people are more likely to make that transition. So younger people, people from black ethnic groups and Asian ethnic groups are more likely to make that transition. and people from less deprived areas and males are less likely to make it. And then down the bottom we've got people transitioning from no care to residential care. And this is sort of the mirror image. So younger people are less likely and black and Asian groups less likely to make that transition. So these are transitions that are about um well they should reflect greater care needs. So people having increasing need for care, maybe because they're getting more frail or have an onset of a new condition, but the specific kind of support that they're going to get is going to depend on their main reason for needing support. So whether it's mental health or physical health, whether it's dementia or sensory, and it's also going to depend on the other sources support they have might have like family um and friends. Oh, then this is um looking at the factors that are associated with a transition to less intensive care. So these are people that have moved from care at home to no no care and this is less likely for younger people, black ethnic groups. So it's quite difficult to interpret this I find but I I was sorting it round a little bit. It means that older people, white ethnic groups, and people in more deprived areas um are more likely to be making these transitions. And this might be because they've gone on to a short-term reabablement package after a hospital discharge. So, actually, these transition probabilities are maybe reflecting that they've had that hospitalization and then they've had that short-term care and now they've moved out of it. And then similarly down the bottom, transitioning from residential care to low care is um less likely for black ethnic groups. And again, so it might be that white ethnic groups are transitioning out of short-term packages after their hospital discharge. Um and they might have to go into residential care for just a short while either because their families are not able to provide support or maybe there's um like self- neglect or other challenges in the home. And then this is transitions from um either care at home to deceased or residential care to deceased. Um so this is um less likely for younger people, uh less likely for black ethnic groups, more likely for males. And that very much reflects the life expectancy patterns that you see um nationally. And then down the bottom, it's quite interesting to see that Asian ethnic groups um they tend to be in residential homes until they die. U this is um an approach that also can give you sjourn times which um I don't know how useful it is with only the five years of followup but it calculates the total amount of time that a person has spent in each of the different states. So you can see here that people from black ethnic groups are slightly more likely to have a longer stay in adult social care but the differences are not statistically significant. But that's something we're going to probe a bit more to try and understand if there's any inequalities or um sort of disparities going on. So yeah, just um moving on to the assumptions and limitations really. So I've mentioned the probability of the next transition is assumed to depend only on the current one. I think that's a reasonable um assumption sort of conditional on the things that other coariants we put in the model. But another assumption is that the transition probabilities are constant over time and that seems to be a really quite major limitation because um this is obviously covers the period of the COVID pandemic. We had a lot more than usual transitions to death and an increase in requests to adult social care. So I think that's something that I really need to take account of in the future modeling. Um obviously I've said this is just a Brent local authority perspective. There are other kinds of care that are not included and we've had to simplify the data a lot. So we're not including some kinds of packages. We have lumped together care at home which goes from sort of one or two hours of care a week right through to having your own front door but in a you know warden controlled um home. So really a lot of heterogeneity there probably Um I've mentioned that we're only looking about end of year transitions and so within year transitions are ignored and um yeah I've only included people for these five years of follow-up and I'm just sort of trying to think through what that means for the the long-term projections whether that's useful or a bit of a limitation. Um so implications we're not really there yet I would say but so this is just an initial attempt to use longitudinal data from adult social care something that we haven't really done very much yet within the burough so um yeah looking forward to hearing other people's experiences but one of the things we wanted to do was to look at trying to reduce those transitions into more intensive care and particularly from care at home to residential hair. Um, but what we actually didn't find any of the dem demographic factors were related. So, we haven't so far found any features that are um associated with making that transition. So, I think something we want to do next is to incorporate health conditions and health trajectories. Um, because we've got that linked data into the NHS, that's possible. Um, we would like to use a new index of multiple deprivation scores. think about that care at home in a bit more detail and um maybe use alternative modeling approaches. It's been suggested to me that neural networks might be a way to go but I have no idea. So very much um yeah very much welcome any questions or suggestions as to how it might take this forward. So please do get in touch if you're um using similar data. So is the question did I look at health conditions? Yeah, one of the the next steps. So I haven't looked at um the reasons why people are going into adult social care at all. Um but yeah, bringing in that health aspect is really important. Um I did look at hospital admissions um but I haven't sort of thoroughly thoroughly looked at it yet but um it didn't seem that hospital admissions that I mean it wasn't that everybody that had an adult social care package was related to hospital admission but I need to tease that out a lot more. Yeah. So not receiving adult social care to us here this means that they're not getting local authority adult social care. So either that's because they're selfunding or they are maybe getting informal care just from their family and friends or they are not needing or getting any care at all. So that's a really big heterogeneous group as well. Um so yeah that is a good point that as well as the other things need to be separated out a bit more but obviously it's really difficult to get information on um on those things why we don't have good data on selfunding and informal care very much a local authority perspective that will hopefully inform our provision but it's not for wider so can we disting distinguish residential care and nursing care. Yes, we can do that. Um, we know what kind of care home they're in and what kind of package. Um, I suspect the numbers might be a little bit small um for us to do a lot of probing into what's related to those things. Um, and another extension to this analysis would be maybe to look across the whole of Northwest London rather than just the Brent burough because you'd then be getting more numbers. But, um, I think there's maybe a challenge of that as well in that not every burough sets up its adult social care data in the same way. So, I think that would be something that we'd really like to do. I think maybe Imperial actually is thinking of um, taking this forward. So they probably have more capability to look right across the burers and do some more advanced modeling. &gt;&gt; Thanks. That's a really um good answer. I think you probably have time for just one more uh which is um David Ellis asks um and it's just a clarification I think. Did you have the one base set of conversion probabilities that were then modified for each specific group? Was that based on the the data or existing literature? &gt;&gt; Uh so if I understand the question correctly, um did we just start off with one initial set of starting values and was that based on data or the literature? Um we just had one set of values. Yes. Um which was based on the data. So if that's a big limitation, do feel free to email me and let me know how to do it differently. &gt;&gt; Thanks very much, Mai. Um just bear with me one second. I think we might be Are we ready to move on? Can somebody let me know? I think maybe the answer is no. Um, so if you don't mind, perhaps there is another question I can find for you. Um, if there are any other questions in the chat, please let let me know. Um, seen a couple of people saying that it looks like a really great analysis. Um what yeah what do what do you think about this as a research area with with the the the problems of small budgets and increasing demand is is what's it like as a researcher? &gt;&gt; So I think the question is what's it like as a researcher with limited budgets? Um, I don't know if that refers to limited budgets for adult social care or for research, but um, I'll answer it from the analyst point of view. Um, I hope I've understood the question correctly, but uh, yeah, it's quite difficult in local authority when you're trying to learn a new method. I think um, obviously we um, we're quite a small team and we don't have huge statistical resources. So collaborating with um universities or some other organizations that have done this modeling is really what we need to do. So I'm really hoping that this is a chance to connect with other people that are doing similar or grappling with similar kinds of problems. Um as I say the adult social care data has got quite a lot of potential but I don't think it's been realized at all within our burough yet. So, um, &gt;&gt; yeah, it feels like the maybe social care is a little bit further behind in terms of, you know, maybe compared to the NHS in terms of what we're doing with the data.