What we're going to do now is get on to the final presentation for this workstream and indeed um the hacker uh 2025 before the the closing remarks. Uh and you're very lucky that it's it's Tom Prenagast from a senior data analyst at the health foundation who's going to talk about the worked data lab. Uh what can links data tell us about the elective care waiting list? Um so over to you Tom. &gt;&gt; Uh hi everybody. Uh yeah, thanks so much for the intro. Uh yes. So uh as David mentioned uh my name is Tom Prenagghast. Uh I work at the health foundation and I'm a senior data analyst uh on the networks data lab team. Uh and I'm here to talk to you today about our work that we've done over the past year or so uh on the elective waiting list using link data in several different localities in Britain. Um so yeah with within the foundation I work on uh the network data lab or the NDL. Uh so the NDL is a network of analytical teams that are funded uh by the foundation and we work together using linked data to analyze uh key shared issues uh in health and care. Uh so the five labs that we work with are in northwest London uh leads uh as West Yorkshire ITB uh Cheshure Cheshure and Muryside uh Grampian and in Wales covering the whole country of Wales. Uh and all of these locations were selected for uh participation in the program because they already had a particularly advanced uh and extensive local ecosystems of linked health and care data when the program began a few years ago. Um so we collectively choose uh a different topic to focus on every year. Uh and for 2024 25 uh that topic was the elected care waiting list. Uh so to start with the initial scoping phase for that work uh so we spoke with uh to our initial research priorities which included several different teams from NHSE including uh the elective analysis team and the national healthcare inequalities program. Uh we also spoke to uh ger getting right first time as long as other leading health and care analysts from uh the strategy unit the kings funds nfield trust uh and others. uh and we also had uh input from the local elective care teams uh in all the indoor labs at various ICPs. So hearing what their local priorities were and what would be most helpful for them uh on the ground. Uh and we also discussed the potential research questions uh with a panel of patients and the public uh who we continue to engage uh throughout the whole uh project life cycle. So right from the the formation of the research questions up until uh the final publication uh that we produced based on the work. Uh so the purpose of all this engagement was to identify where there are gaps that uh decision makers or or patients in the public would like to see filled. Uh and in particular where there's uh knowledge gaps that the NDL with its access to these uh very extensive linked data systems uh would be well poised to fill. Uh and so from those conversations uh we found that there was two primary topics uh of interest that came up again and again. Um so we heard that there were this was about a year and a half ago that we were doing this. Uh and at the time we heard that there were research gaps uh surrounding measuring the impact of waiting uh for elective care on patients and on the health and care system. Uh so this is of course something that requires linking uh data on the waiting list and waiting times uh to wider health data. search of primary care to secondary care prescribing data etc. Uh and not a huge amount of research had been able to do that before. Uh and the second question was about understanding who is disproportionately impacted by waiting. So that's both disparities in waiting times uh but also in terms of uh impact on health. Uh so there wasn't much information out there on disparities and weight times yet when we were uh scoping this project. Uh of course more recently uh data has been released by NHSE which which covers um uh disparities and waiting times between population groups. Um and in terms of impact on health uh of course that that would require the same linkages as the first question would. So these were these were both identified as gaps that the NDL would be uh well suited to fill. Uh and so based on that we uh put together three uh core research questions uh and they were explored for uh all patients who were waiting for elective care regardless of what procedure uh they were waiting for. So so this covered uh all specialties. Um so first we examined how long people were waiting uh as well as the reasons that people were removed from waiting lists. why uh waiting periods ended. Uh and we also looked at uh how much health care people used before, during and after uh being on the waiting list. Uh that question was only um examined for uh people whose waiting times had ended with treatment. Um and for each one of these questions, we examined how all of these metrics uh varied by demographic and health characteristics. Uh just as a note uh the standards that we measured waiting times by are slightly different between uh England and Scotland. Uh so in uh England we use the RT standard. So from uh initial referral to to first treatment or or any other um reason for a clock stop. Um and uh in Scotland we use the uh treatment time guarantee standard which is for inpatient weights only um and uh is measured as time from agreement for impatient or daycase treatment up until the receipt uh of that treatment. So uh important to keep in mind when we're comparing stats from our English labs compared to those from uh our colleagues in Grampion that uh what they're looking at is slightly different in terms of uh the population who it's looking at and also the the periods of time uh that we're examining. uh so the range of data uh used by each lab to answer those questions uh varied but there were commonalities between them. So uh for instance in English labs uh extracts from sus were uh used for secondary care contacts including uh emergency care uh elective admissions and outpatient attendances uh and emergency admissions. uh all of them also had uh access to data on GP appointments and other primary care events uh which our colleagues in Grampion uh didn't have access to. Um and in all English labs uh the waiting list minimum data set or the WLMDS uh was used uh to uh provide information on waiting periods uh and waiting times uh in in Grampian the Scottish morbidity records uh general acute inpatient and daycase data set was used for those purposes. Um and uh if anybody else is uh interested in kind of how we process the WLMDS and how we used it for this work because there's some kind of quite idiosyncratic challenges to that um we actually wrote a blog on that topic which we'll link via a QR code uh later on in this session. Uh yes so just to start with the results for our first research questions this is on how long uh people were waiting for and how this differed across population groups. Uh so we found that although most waiters were waiting for 18 weeks or less uh still 27 to 33% of people uh were waiting for longer than that depending uh on location. Uh so this is quite a bit uh off of the NHS target of 92% of people coming off the waiting list within 18 weeks. Uh and then when we broke that down we found that uh waiting times differ dramatically by specialty which we'll go into in more detail uh in a moment. Um, but along with that, somewhat unsurprisingly, older people, people with higher frailty, uh, and more long-term conditions tended to have, uh, shorter waiting times. Uh, this probably, you know, isn't something that we would think about as an inequality, but it rather, uh, reflects, uh, local prior, sorry, local prioritization decisions, uh, based on need. Uh, people who are waiting for, uh, more than one procedure also tended to have longer, uh, wait times than people who were waiting for only a single procedure. Um and otherwise uh there did appear to be uh inequalities and waiting times between ethnic groups and quintiles of deprivation. Uh so for example we saw that patients who lived in more deprived areas in almost all cases had longer median weight times than people who lived in more affluent areas. Uh and also that uh people with black, Asian or mixed backgrounds tended to have higher average weight times uh than white patients did. Uh so as I mentioned specialty was the stratifier that we saw the widest range of variation around uh in terms of weight time uh both between categories but also uh between NDL locations. Uh so as we can see here while there are some specialties that have uniformly weight uh uniformly long weights uh between uh locations uh so for instance Troman orthopedics uh where almost uh all labs have more or less the exact same median weight time uh in many cases there's quite a wide range of median weight times between uh the various NDL labs uh within each specialty. Uh so for instance you can see here that uh neurology and neurosurgery uh had particularly uh long wait times in northwest London uh while gynecology was particularly high in West Yorkshire and Chester Muryside but uh less so in northwest London. Uh so here we can see breakdowns of inequalities in weight time by ethnic group deprivation. Uh the differences aren't necessarily huge uh but they are present. uh and the patterns that we observed here are roughly in line with the national patterns that uh you can observe in the data that NHS England have released uh in the past couple of months. Um and then when we cross tabulated that with other variables uh we saw that inequalities by ethnic group uh appear to remain even when accounting uh for differences uh in IMD uh distribution. Uh so for instance you can see here uh that within the most deprived quintile those uh in medium weight times. This is medium weight time in days uh still persisted. Uh so within categories, not just kind of across all categories. Um and they also often persisted uh when accounting for age as well. So um we can see here in terms of IMD that when you break it down uh by age bands, this is an example from West Yorkshire. Once again these uh inequalities between uh the least deprived and the most deprived uh areas uh persist within uh age bands. Uh and then we also performed this exercise where we created uh kind of expected uh mean weight times in terms of uh kind of taking the uh local age distribution of uh different ethnic groups in NDL areas and then kind of modeling what we would expect their weight time to be based on that. uh and we found that uh in almost all cases the uh observed uh difference uh between uh ethnic groups was greater um in the actual observed data than it was uh among the expected weight times that were modeled. Uh then to look at our second research question so regarding why people were removed from the waiting list. Uh so this was a question that we had trouble answering fully uh because of poor data quality. Uh so north of sun leads uh around 40% uh of reasons for leaving the waiting list uh were unidentifiable uh in the data. Uh and this variable has this problem for a couple of reasons. So uh on the one hand in some locations it's just poorly or inconsistently filled out because of uh either validation issues or technological limitations. Uh so the WLMDS the waiting list minimum data set is submitted on a weekly basis uh not on a monthly basis like the RT data. Uh so it's validation um thresholds are are lower and it's not subject to kind of the same level of validation for it's released. Um but also in some cases data will have stopped being submitted for a waiting period for some time even though no clock stop uh was submitted. So there but there's not a piece of data specifically saying this pathway ended but um data hasn't been submitted on it for a very long time. Uh so it's assumed that uh that um those pathways have ended. Uh but we obviously don't know uh why they ended because of that lack of data. Um but data was sufficiently filled out in Cheshure and Mury side um where only about 5% um of waiting times uh had ends that we couldn't identify. Um and in trees and emergency side we found that less than half of pathways so about 48% uh ended due to receipt of first treatment. Uh and nearly a third ended due to decision not to treat. Um which is a category that encompasses quite a wide range of uh pathway ends uh which we'll expand on in a moment. Um but uh very few pathways ended due to did not attends. It's less than 1%. Uh but the rate of did not attends for the most deprived quintile was double that uh of the least deprived. Um and wait the reasons for leaving the waiting list uh much like weight times uh varied most marketkedly by specialty. Uh so we can see that specialty level difference here. Uh so there's some not especially surprising results like for instance that plastic surgery had the highest rate of clock stops due to first treatment while el elderly medicine very frequently uh says pathways end due to the initiation of active monitoring. Uh but there are some curious ones. Uh so some very long waiting specialties including neurology, gynecology and ENT uh all have relatively high proportions of pathways that end due to decisions uh not to treat. Uh so this raises questions about whether uh the long wait uh either caused the condition to to change in some way that perhaps it needed to the approach needed to needed to change. Um but also this could signal people dropping off uh the waiting list because someone dropping off to pursue private options uh isn't separately identified uh as a reason for a waiting time ending. Uh that actually falls into the decision not to treat category. So uh we don't know exactly how many people might be responding to long weights with that option or if these decisions not to treat are happening for other reasons. Uh and obviously we are also limited by our lack of comparators here. Uh but one of our key takeaways was that this is a variable in in the data that uh should be given special attention uh in future data quality improvements because there's some really crucial information that uh that isn't that clear in the data currently. Um then our final main research question related to how much health care people used uh before, during and after their waiting period. Um so what we found here was that aside from GP appointments and prescriptions, uh healthcare use was relatively rare across the cohort. Um so even after cost waiting uh GP appointments um in all cases substantially outweighed A&amp;E attendances despite an A&amp;E attendance of course being much more expensive form uh of contact with the healthare system than seeing a GP. Um and we also saw that deprivation was associated with higher healthcare use uh across all time periods uh but especially while waiting and particularly in emergency care categories. Uh and then finally something that we noticed that was quite unexpected was that people tended to use more health care before and after uh being on the waiting list uh than they did during the waiting period itself. So uh we would assume that this reflects increased health care use possibly while trying to receive a referral uh in the period before uh they officially join the waiting list. Um and afterwards this could be uh care for complications or or follow-ups in the immediate aftermath of treatment. Um the these are patterns that did vary somewhat by points of delivery though and they weren't always consistent between specialties or between population groups. Uh so there's a number of specialties which saw the highest rates of healthcare use during the waiting period especially those that that are aimed towards older patients such as elderly medicine. Um and that might indicate some additional challenges uh for people waiting for for particular services or who uh fall into particular um population groups uh compared to others. Uh so just to zoom in a little bit more on some of those results. So uh we can see here some of these patterns in healthcare usage as this is an example from West Yorkshire. Uh and this shows GP and A&amp;E attendances uh way weight weighted by the average tariff associated with them. Um and that's per 100 person weeks. Uh so this is adjusted uh for for waiting time. Um and both any attendances and GP appointments are higher in the three months before the waiting period, lowest while waiting and then rebound after, although not quite to the height of the uh pre-waiting period. Uh this was relatively consistent across all NDL locations uh when looking at all specialties and patient groups together. So so this is uh generally true in the aggregate although when you break down uh by specialty or by group sometimes these patterns uh do change. Um and then we can also see here that after cost waiting uh as I mentioned before GP appointments far outweigh A&amp;E attendances. Uh despite the fact that uh on average an A&amp;E tariff is about 5 to 10 times uh the cost of a GP appointment. Uh so of course if this wasn't cost weighted the the amount of GP appointments kind of in raw events would be far far larger uh than A&amp;E attendances and would would outweigh it even more than it does here. Um and then when we look in a little bit more detail at the post treatment period and we break it down by weight length uh we can see that longer waiters actually had relatively greater increases in healthcare use after treatment than the people who waited below 18 weeks. Uh so in this example from northwest London we can see emergency care so this is A&amp;E attendances uh go down compared to the waiting period for people who waited below 18 weeks. uh but it actually increased uh for people who waited more than 18 weeks with the relative increase going up as weight lengths go up. Um we should mention here that this is relative this isn't an absolute term. So the shorter waiting groups which tend to be older, they tend to have higher frailty, more long-term conditions, etc. than uh long longer waiting groups, uh they do almost always use a lot more health care than those longer waiting groups do in absolute terms. But what we're looking at here is relative differences in their healthcare use while they're on the waiting list compared to after they leave uh the waiting list. Uh and then finally in terms of uh variation between population groups uh so we can see here that there's quite a clear gradients in between the uh most deprived um quintile uh deprivation compared to the least deprived. Uh this is in uh emergency care. Um and this is something that we did observe uh in most points of healthcare delivery and in all uh time periods that we examined as well. uh but the relative difference was greatest within emergency care for one thing which I think is expected and kind of in line with uh with most other literature. Um but also the difference was uh greatest during the waiting period. So this does imply that perhaps even though the general patterns we saw implied kind of less healthcare use during the waiting period uh compared to others uh this does maybe imply that uh some population groups face quite particular challenges during the waiting period uh compared to others. Uh so in terms of next steps uh we have uh two pieces of follow-up work uh planned on the uh elective waiting list. Uh so on the one hand uh we're currently working on a more detailed analysis of NHS's uh recent releases uh on elective waiting time inequalities uh and also on a project uh investigating the factors associated with greater emergency care use following the receipt of elective treatment. Uh so that's kind of looking at that result uh that I showed before showing how uh the relative uh increase uh in emergency care use went up as weightlength went up. Obviously, that's just kind of like quite a simplistic descriptive finding, but uh we're kind of planning a more elaborate um causal analysis that would actually aim to isolate the the effect uh of weight time and try to investigate uh whether it is weight time that appears to be uh increasing those groups healthcare use after treatment. Um I think there is actually supposed to be one other point here which is just on impact uh which is that recently uh we heard from our colleagues uh in Grampion that uh deprivation has been added to the kind of roster of information that clinicians uh are supplied with making prioritization decisions based on um their work uh on the kind of relationship between deprivation and increased healthcare use and increased challenges while uh on the waiting list. Uh so in terms of the future of the NDL so uh as a whole we've moved on to our next topic which is on housing and health. Um and at the end of 2026 uh the NDL program will end altogether. Uh but we will be putting together one final piece of work uh compiling learnings from all our previous projects. Uh so uh the NDL is a very large network and there's many many people uh to thank. So we have uh authorship and acknowledge acknowledgements here. Uh and then we also have QR codes for the various publications that we produced based on this work. So we have a briefing uh which summarizes all the uh results that I've just gone through and more. Uh we have a blog that was uh published uh in the HSJ uh which goes through some of the policy implications uh of our results. Uh and then finally we have a blog about working with the waiting list minimum data set uh which is on medium. But uh yeah that's all for me. Thanks so much. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you, Tom. Another brilliant presentation. Um we're apologies to you because I'm sure there's lots of lots of people, lots of questions um for you, but we're going to need to just um move to the the final session now. Really great presentation though, Tom. Thank you. And again, do reach out to um to Tom using the people function. Um so all it leaves for me to do is to thank you very much for joining this stream today. Um, and I'm not going to hold you up any longer than that cuz I'm sure you want to get over to the closing session where Andy Olowski is going to provide some uh closing remarks for Hacker 2025. So, thank you again and they're waiting for you over in the main room. So, uh, go and enjoy that final talk. Thank you so much.