back. Um, I hope you got a break or five minutes to grab a drink or a toilet breaker, etc. I go into way too much detail. Uh, but welcome back to the targeting care and advancing an analytics stream. Um, I've got another great speaker for you now. Her name is Ella Barber. She's a data scientist at the National Cancer Audit uh collaborating uh center. And um and Ella's going to talk to you about the uh making national cancer audit reporting shiny. So uh we love that. Um now Ella's going to speak for the full 15 minutes. So but I still uh encourage you to put questions in the chat uh or contact her afterwards using the uh the the chat button within the platform. So Ella, take it away. Thanks very much Karen. So I'm presenting work today on behalf of the National Lung Cancer Audit team. So the National Lung Cancer Audit sits within the National Cancer Audit Collaborating Center. Um the National Lung Cancer Audit is one of 10 audits that sit within the National Cancer Audit Collaborating Center. This comprises six new cancer audits that were initiated in 2022 and four established audits that moved into Natan in 2023. To reduce data burden on hospital staff, NATCAN audits do not collect clinical data directly. Instead, they use nationally mandated flows of data from hospitals to the National Disease Registration Service in England and the Welsh Cancer Network in public health Wales. Using this approach, NATCAM receives clinical information for every patient diagnosed with cancers covered by its 10 national audits in England and Wales. NHS organizations therefore do not need to formally register for these audits or provide additional data. And the figure on the right just outlines some of the English data sets available to NATCAN. So specifically, we work with council registry data and link that then link that to a number of other data sets listed here. So at the time this project started the existing reporting format was an annual state of the nation report. This included 10 performance indicators and made five key recommendations to highlight where services should focus their quality improvement activities. Historically provider level results were distributed as manually prepared static Excel files with limited visualization or interactivity. When the lung cancer audit joined Natan, the frequency of reporting was proposed to increase from annually to quarterly and this created an opportunity for a new way of working. We started by setting out the minimum viable product for our quarterly report. The aim was to present performance indicators responsive to changes over time to support healthcare providers to track their progress and monitor quality improvement and to provide results via an interactive dashboard. The content was three years of three years of results at quarterly time increments and the analysis made use of the rapid cancer registration data. Indicators were selected from our annual report and informed by advice from clinical leads and with consideration to indicators that we would be responsive to short-term changes and where we had sufficient patient numbers. Our intended audience was NHS provider teams in England and this is because currently we only receive quarterly date we only receive data on a quarterly basis for England and not Wales. Unfortunately, our approach to development was to start simple and then make iterative and incremental changes from there. We welcomed user feedback and we used that to guide the changes and future updates that we made. Whilst moving the dashboard from Excel to shiny, it was really important that we continued to maintain our quarterly reporting publication timelines. In terms of the development timeline, this occurred in two phases. The first phase was when the lung cancer audit acted as a pilot for quarterly reporting within NATCAM. This started in July 2023 and initially we used the Microsoft Excel format because this is something that both internal and external stakeholders were familiar with. By April 2024, the dashboard format had transitioned from Excel to shiny and the minimum viable product in shiny was really well received and the pilot considered a success. The second phase of development was a Natanwide roll out of shiny dashboards across all audits and this also involved the formation of a dashboard working group within Napan. By April 2025, shiny dashboards were deployed for all NACAN audits. By sharing modular code across audits, we this enabled 90% to launch within three months. And importantly, efficiencies delivered in quarterly reporting freed up analyst time for other priorities such as quality improvement initiatives. So I just wanted to walk through some screenshots of what the initial um simple design looked like in Excel and how we moved that across to Shiny. So as I mentioned, it was fairly simple to start with. So just three tabs an introductory tab an acknowledgements tab and then the dashboard here itself there were two user inputs the first to select the trust and the second to select the indicator below that we provided some provided some information on the numerator and denominator definition as well as details of any risk adjustment and some brief information on how we calculate control limits and the moving average. This main figure on the right is dynamic and so as the user inputs change this figure updates automatically. One um limitation that we ran into was um small numbers. So this indicator presented here is restricted to a specific disease subtype as well as a specific stage and performance status. When we look at reporting this indicator at trust level and then break it down into quarterly time increments, the numbers get very small and needed to be suppressed as a number of points and this results in an interruption to the time trend that you see here. Therefore, not all indicators in our annual report were feasible to be included in our quarterly report. So these screenshots are from a very early version of the shiny app um which was initially designed to align with that that I've just presented in Excel. So if you follow the QR code to the live version of our dashboards, um there will be additional functionality and content. Um but this is just to present this um this sort of early work. So at the top there was an overview of the dashboards. Um this sets out the um aims, the intended audience, the data source and the time period. Below that we have again the same two user inputs, those to select a trust and an indicator. Below that we have three results tabs. So the first presents results for the selected trust, the second for the cancer alliance of that selected trust and finally a comparison of all trusts within that same cancer alliance. We have two information tabs. One presents information on the indicator and the second presents more broad information on our methods. These thumbnails here enable the user to download a copy of the figure as a PNG file format. And whilst it's cut off here, below this there is a data table presenting the aggregate data that is used to create this figure. and that can be downloaded in a CSV file format. One feature that um is really popular is the ability to download a trust specific quarterly report and this makes use of parameterized our markdown. Um and this is very similar to what was demonstrated in one of the hacker workshops yesterday. Um you know parameterized uh quartto is a very similar thing and really powerful. So specifically these downloadable reports contain the same information that's presented in the app. it just consolidates all that information into one file download. Um so it avoids our users having to go to various points in the app to scrape together the information um they might need. So no new information, nothing contradictory. Um it provides um an introduction to the audit and our methods and then contains um results for all indicators in our quarterly report. And here are just a few more screenshots of what the content within this report looks like. So on the left here there's a navigation panel and then here is just some of the tables and figures that are contained within that report for each indicator. Briefly I wanted to touch on deployment options and considerations. So some of the factors that we considered um was the ease of use, the cost, the scalability and performance, security and authentication and customization. So three specific options we looked at the first was Posit Connect. This is a commercial platform for enterprise deployment. Its advantages are that it has advanced features for scaling and security, but some disadvantages include a high license cost and that it may be overkill for some simple scenarios. The second was shiny server. This is a free open- source server you self-host on your own infrastructure. The advantages are you have full control with no license fee beyond the server costs. And the disadvantages are that you must manage all security, scaling, and server administration tasks. The option we decided to proceed with was shinyapps.io. This is a cloud-based platform for hosting by Posit. Um, its advantages are that it's very easy to deploy with no server management required. However, some disadvantages include limitations on scalability, customization, and usage hours on the free and lower tiers. So, in terms of our workflow, there were three environments that we made use of. The first was our data analysis environment. This was an on- premises server and an offline environment. This contained our patient level data that we received from NDRS. and we predominantly use stage for data analysis at this stage. The second environment was our shiny application development environment. Initially we made use of dummy data because this allowed the code for the app and the code for the analysis to be developed in parallel. Um once the app structure was was developed we combined this with aggregate data with small number suppression applied and then this was deployed to shinyapps.io. At this stage, access to the app was limited to authorized users by enabling authentication. And this is because there were a number of review rounds that were required pri prior to us publishing publicly. So for example, our project team, our commissioners, and our funders. Once we had approval to publish, this app was moved to the production environment. Again, publicly accessible with no login required. This slide here just presents how we built on our minimum viable product. So there were a number of stakeholders that we worked with to collect feedback. Um weekly we would meet with our internal audit team and the natan data working group. On a monthly basis we would meet with the audit project team and the clinical effectiveness unit within the royal college of surgeons. And on a three-monthly basis we had the quarterly report um reviewed by our funders and commissioners. On a six-monthly basis we would meet with our clinical reference group and our patient and public involvement. So there's a lot of feedback coming from a diverse range of stakeholders and we used the canban board to um colleate this and provide visibility of the workflow for our team members. So as I mentioned the feedback is used to populate the backlog and each task is then represented by a card that moves from one column to the next as it progresses through the workflow columns and the columns represent different stages for example doing in review and done. This enabled us to focus on continuous improvement. So each quarter we would review the backlog and then prioritize features features for development based on team capacity that quarter. This also enabled us to limit work in progress and prevent bottlenecks. This slide here sets out the timeline of the additional functionality and content that we've added to the dashboard since it first launched in April 2024. And this is really I won't go into the details. These slides will be shared afterwards. So by all means do do have a look if you're interested. But just really to highlight that we not only result the uh not only update the data and results but we have also added additional functionality um in response to feedback that we've received. We've also run a number of external showcases um as we've developed and released these dashboards and this is really to raise awareness engagement and again to collect feedback. Finally I just wanted to um touch on some challenges and opportunities that we encountered during the second phase of development. So some of the challenges centered around the need to balance consistency requirements across natcan audits with bespoke requirements for individual audits. So some of the for some examples of natan y consistency included branding. We wanted to have a family feel to the natan audits and also for the layout and navigation of the app to be consistent. We had some end user that would need to collect results across all cancer audits. And therefore, it was important once they um were familiar and understood how to work with one app that was applicable to um apps for other audits and also importantly consistency and formatting of the backend data. For example, healthcare provider names and how those providers map to cancer alliances. In terms of the audit specific requirements, the branding metrics and subgroup reporting will bespoke to each audit. Um and whilst each audit reports results at the level of the trust and cancer alliance, there were some bespoke requirements required for the organizational level of reporting. For example, the national national ovarian cancer audit required reporting at the level of the gyological cancer system in addition to trust and cancer alliance. In terms of the opportunities, we ran a number of active stakeholder consultation activities during phase two. This included an enduser survey and um stakeholder focus groups. We took the opportunity to refactor our code and parameterized the app code to make it structure audit agnostic. We automated testing of input data to ensure its consistency with app requirements. We also clarified roles and responsibilities. So specifically we centralized the production of common aspects of the shiny app such as the user interface and reactivity. And then we localized production of audit specific aspects of the shiny app. So audit specific text presented and audit specific data and parameters. In terms of the impact of this second phase of development, the use of R markdown in the visual editing mode provided an introduction to R across the department, enabling those without prior coding experience to edit app edit text within the app. Our focus group feedback highlighted how dashboards have enabled better support for datadriven decision-making for providers. And finally, efficiencies in this approach to quarterly reporting have freed analyst time for other priorities such as quality improvement initiative. And this is just really I just wanted to conclude by saying we really do welcome user feedback and it does guide the changes we make to future updates. So you know please if you do have comments, criticisms, suggestions, we really welcome them and please do get in touch. Finally I just wanted to conclude with some acknowledgements. So firstly to the national lung cancer audit project team their photos are presented here and also our clinical reference group and patient and public involvement forum. Secondly, those members of the dashboard working group that were involved in the second phase of development. They are listed here. I'd also like to specifically thank the NHSR community. So, as a minority R user within my department, um I made use of their coffee and code sessions and their workshops. Um it's a really supportive community. Um and I found those drop-in sessions incredibly beneficial, you know, throughout the throughout the duration of this project. Um I'd also point to this book by Hadley Wickham, Mastering Shiny. um I didn't know much about app development before I started this project. It's a brilliant introduction. There are really nice code simple code um examples that you can then apply to your use case. Um and finally, I'd just like to conclude by thanking um the strategy unit and the health foundation for today's conference. I know how much work goes into organizing these events. Um it's fantastic. I thoroughly enjoyed attending events yesterday. Um and just really thanks very much for the opportunity to present this work today. Thank you. Well done and thank you very much, Ella. You promised me you would be 15 minutes and spot on and you absolutely were. We love it when someone's practiced. Um yeah, a huge big thank you. There's lots of clapping going on um to uh to say thank you. Um Yewen's loving uh you rap and um and a mention there uh for the coffee and code and and we'd welcome anybody in the code. &gt;&gt; Thank you. My job now is going to be to introduce your next speakers. Uh so if you have any questions for Ella, do put do find her in the discussion u space.