Hello, welcome back everyone. I hope you've all had a refreshing break involving your uh favorite beverage. Uh I had the great pleasure of introducing uh Jess Moley earlier on today and I've got another great pleasure now of introducing uh Jess Moley again along with another great friend of uh our wonderful analytical community. Um, so could I please welcome for a fireside chat uh Jess Moley who will be uh talking to Ellen Cochland. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much. &gt;&gt; Lovely. Here we all are. Thank you so much Chris. Um I mean I don't really think that Jess needs um a huge amount of introduction and we're going to be talking about Jess's career anyway for the next um 45 minutes. So please do put your questions in the chat. But Jess of course is dialing in from the US where she's an associate research scientist at Yale Digital Ethics Center. Um a move that she made after some time at the Bennett Institute at the University of Oxford where incidentally she also collected maybe half of the alphabet um in various academic accolades. So very very pleased to be interviewing you today, Jess. And to kind of kick off, can you tell me about something that you're working on um that you're really interested in and excited about? Yeah, sure. Thank you so much and hi again everyone. Um, so there is a bunch of stuff I'm currently working on. Um, but I think the most interesting thing and the most exciting thing is I'm currently looking at how you use data and AI and analytics in general better for um population health modeling rather than sort of individual level risk prediction or population health management in that sense, but a little bit more of trying to understand what's going on in a system perspective and how we intervene there. And it's just super nerdy but really fun. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I loved So last year of course at at Rewide you did an amazing talk on that um and the idea of really like channeling AI into public health and kind of collective good which I think is really refreshing against a sort of I guess global rhetoric of a billionaire fraternity of like tech bros basically. Um earlier you said you enjoyed being canceled so let's just lean right into it. Um so uh yeah that was really refreshing and I think um a perspective that we don't hear so much on our um various stages that we that we spend time on. And so I just want to learn a little bit more about the values that have shaped your career thus far and continue to do so. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, so I think I was talking about this the other day with someone actually that I basically everything I do is kind of values driven and ultimately my entire research program is values driven. There are things I believe in and then I work backwards from there as opposed to I'm going to think about and do something and then that's going to determine what I think about it from a values perspective. Um I suppose the biggest value that drives that is some understanding of equity, fairness. Um along along those lines, I think I believe in every fiber of my soul um that everybody has an an equal right to not just access to care, but they have an equal right to outcomes that they find themselves to be desirable. So not outcomes that are determined by others and imposed on them but outcomes that are determined by themselves and then they have an equal right to achieve those and it is our responsibility as healthcare designers broadly writ. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, and are there particular people that you have worked with or would like to work with that you've looked at their career and thought that's the sort of career I admire or the kind of person that I admire? And is is that how what kind of leads you to work with different people? Yes and no. Um, there are definitely people who I think like that. There's, for example, there's Trish Greenhal, Professor Trish Greenhill at um, she's back, she's at the University of Oxford. Uh I think she's had an amazing career where she's bridged being clinical herself. So she's a general practitioner and but she's also done an enormous amount of work in both the sort of theorizing space the sort of high church social science thinking of how this stuff works. Um but also really practical and you know she was on the COVID board and like uh scientific board etc. Um I have my supervisor uh professor Luchano Floyd who currently works um he runs the department of health of um he runs the department of health he runs the department that I work for the digital ethics center. Um I he's someone who I really admire not necessarily from a like career trajectory perspective but from uh how he thinks about things. Um &gt;&gt; but I would say I don't necessarily follow people I follow feelings. So if the job is sounds interesting and I think it gives you an opportunity to learn something either about yourself or about the environment in which you're working that's what tends to appeal to me more than people. So when I went for example to work for the Bennett Institute which at the time was the data lab um what really appealed to me about that was being in an environment where the sort of main impetus at least at that period of time was to kind of challenge the status quo and that was very appealing to me but th those are the kinds of things that I tend to follow more than just people. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I and at the Bennett Institute, that's where you were working on open safely and of course the better broader safer report. Um, and just going back to that sort of observation about Trisha's career that she's sort of spanned a few different disciplines and of course your career seen you operate across academia and policy and how do you how do you navigate the differences between those worlds and why do you think that it's important that we bridge those disciplines as we go forward in healthcare or digital technologies and healthcare I guess. &gt;&gt; Uh let's answer the second part of that first. Um, so in terms of why I think it's important because of a few different reasons, but the main one is that the reason I think most of this stuff fails. If you look at it in a simplistic or a sort of reductive sense, why does health tech fail? Um, it tends to be because it's disciplinarily siloed. So there will be a failure because either you focused only on the tech um and nobody spoke to an ethicist or you maybe thought about um designing this from a really uh equitable perspective and then spoke to a lot to ethicists and you did a lot of patients and public involvement and engagement but then you never thought about okay how does this actually work in practice um and what does this mean well when I'm a clinician or you maybe when you're a clinician you think oh this is a really great tool it's allowing me to, you know, check my assumptions when I'm in a in a clinical consultation, but I didn't think about where this might intersect with like things like data protection law. So, my view is that I've always wanted to be useful. Um, I think my main reason for existing is to try and be useful. Um, and so the the main way that I can be useful, I think, is by bridging those gaps. And so that's that's why I try and do it to try and be the gobetween between these different disciplines. And so for example, I think a lot of academia is really isolated from the real world. It's extremely easy to come up with idealized recommendations of how something should work. Yes, you should always do this. You should always make sure AI is explainable, beneficent, blah blah blah. But if you've never been inside the the healthare system or understood how policy works, you're probably not going to be that helpful because you didn't understand all the constraints in the real world environments that are happening. Um, and then in terms of how I have navigated that and crossing different spaces, um, is I think a little bit more what I was just saying before in terms of following my values and following my feelings. Um I don't see there being a difference between those at an aim level. My aim is always the same. Um and what changes is the way in which I approach that aim. So obviously when you're in policy you're thinking at a very high level. Um and you're not necessarily thinking through all of these different things because the pace is different. And then when I've been in the NHS, my job has been to answer this one very specific question and I'm going to do it in this very specific way. Um, and then in academia, I guess my kind of job is to try and pull all of those strands together and then say them back to the system in a way that is um, interesting and useful based on my previous exper experience of having been in those environments. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I guess just the experience of having been in all those different envir in different environments and having that multid-disiplinary perspective people might be listening and thinking well you know I've worked mostly in you know one of those disciplines. What kind of I guess insight or advice could you give to people who might be thinking well I'd like to sort of get some experience in one of those other disciplines or to get that different perspective but haven't been able to. um how might they do that or and how did you do it? &gt;&gt; Um so in terms of how you might do it and this is but the answer to to those things is the same how you might do it and how I did do it was essentially my main career advice in this thing is if you're ever going to try and shift focus what you should always be doing is doing it already in some capacity so that you can demonstrate to the place in which you want to move into that you have the skills and the interests in in doing that. Um so for example where when I was working in in the NHS I one of the things I was always doing already was commenting on policy and then when when I moved into policy um I was already always trying to engage with the tech people and then I was like okay I need to understand um how this actually works under hood under the hood. So let me go and do um the code academy course in Python. And then uh it was the same and then I went back to Oxford. it was like, okay, now I really want to try and use all of my academic insights to influence from the outside. And that's when I started doing things like blogging um and using Twitter before it became a hell space quite extensively um to to try and get those opinions across because basically what you want to the what you want to do is get in the room. Um, and the best way to get in the room is for your name to already be associated with the room you want to be in. So that when the people who are inviting you into the room, uh, start thinking of who I'm going to invite into the room, your name comes up already. Um, and the best way to do that is already be doing it in some form of visible way. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Love that. And certainly have been um, as you know, as you know, I've been a creep all day looking at your um, LinkedIn. I mean, all day probably all year. um as I did have said to you um a lot of your work from the basis of some work that I've been doing recently. Um and I know also you're on the board of the um BMJ AI and digital health edition and you're looking for submissions um up until April. What kind of submissions are you hoping for and from whom? Because I'm guessing there could be people out there probably are people out there that are watching that might have really interesting insights, project work that you you might want to hear from. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um so absolutely so I I sit on the editorial board of the BMJ uh digital house and AI all year but what we are doing right now is we have a special collection which I am the editor for which is specifically on the governance ethics legal social implications of artificial intelligence in healthcare. I would encourage anyone to interpret AI very broadly. Um we are mostly talking about data um ultimately. So if you're talking about things that are simpler than than an AI neural net, don't worry about it. In terms of submissions, I would personally really welcome submissions from almost anyone because one of the things that we are deliberately trying to do or I am deliberately trying to do with that uh collection is bridge some of these disciplinary silos. So one of the things for example we deliberately put in the call is practical examples of thinking through the ethical and the implications of deploying these things in real time. um a lot of academics do not have that experience. They can, as I said, they can think about it um in an abstract context, but have never been inside a hospital making the decision to go or go live or not. Um so I would love people to feel as though they are up for that. Um and if you've never done that type of writing before, don't also don't let that be a barrier. That's my job as an editor is to try and help with that process. Um and I am very very willing to either talk to people before it gets to that stage or to help at an editorial stage if I think the idea is good. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think also there's a massive role. I mean I at the health foundation we um like I'm very I'm lucky to work in a team where our you know managers and leaders are are really up for that kind of um like helping you with your learning development career progression in that sense right. Um, and so is there any is there anything that you can sort of advice that you can give to other leaders and managers who might want to see their team develop in that way but aren't quite sure how to how to begin? Is it just trying to get their name out there? &gt;&gt; So my view very very strongly with jobs and therefore what your job is as a manager is that jobs have to go both ways. um that sometimes this idea that your job is a bit transactional is a negative one. And I think especially if you are someone like me where basically your job is largely your whole identity, it's a bit icky to then try and reduce it to a transaction. But ultimately that's what it is. It is a transactional thing and that transaction has to go both ways. You are serving your job but your job also has to serve you. And so ultimately your task is to think what do I get out of this job that allows me to do the next thing. Um and if you are a manager I believe very strongly that that's your role. So me and my uh as I said professor Luchana Florida we talk about this all the time the the job of me if I am man monitoring or sort of mentoring junior researchers is to remove barriers to enable them to be brilliant. Um so it's like what is it that you want to do you tell me my job is to make it easier for you to do that. Um and so I think with managers it's a little bit about flipping on your its head and not thinking oh what do I do for retention or what do I do for for like this it's I want to invest in this person this person is going to do their best work when they feel satisfied and that they are developing and they're growing and then they're not getting bored that might mean that they leave in 18 months time but I'm actually going to be proud of that rather than annoyed about it. Um, and that means I'm going to open up doors for them to allow them to to do these types of tasks. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Absolutely. And then that obviously has the sort of like net effect of pushing people through their careers and having just like a better ecosystem in which we all work because that feels like a much more kind of inclusive way to be working with your peers, right? Um I guess actually to touch on that briefly um or not so briefly even um you know when we think about STEM technologies AI more broadly as said there's you know there's a lot of kind of what inclusivity means and it has actually been quite &gt;&gt; well it's been a really febr environment in the US recently with the kind of terms around EDI but I'd be interested to you what you think um inclusivity means in this kind of domain and field to you. &gt;&gt; So, a couple of different things, but the the primary one is that one of my big issues with the way in which we design health tech, but also the way in which we sometimes do analytics um is that essentially these are tools that mediate between the real world and the user. Right? So we are already by just focusing on data we are already one step removed from the real world. Then we start doing modeling on the data rather than us playing with the data ourselves and we're further degree removed. Now we are moving into the world of AI where you're doing modeling on the model and we get further and further and further away from reality. Now that is a real problem um when it comes to designing things in an inclusive way because it means that if you are really far away from your end user and your end product and that person own the person who's designing it you are only representative of one type of user. Um you are never going to get in external cues to remind you to look at who the actual end person is because you are too many steps removed. Um so in order to counterbalance that I think we have to do two things. We have to have a wider range of people who are the person who was doing all of this. Um so that they know what to look for even though they are so many degrees removed. Um and that is a wider range in a whole bunch of senses. I don't just mean making sure that we have people of all uh colors, creeds, religions, genders, ethnicities, all of that type of stuff. I also mean in terms of lived experience and disciplinary experience. I do not for example think we should only be allowing um computer scientists to design AI. I think we also need social scientists and we need artists and we need clinicians um and we need patient experience engagement managers. So that's point number one. Point number two is an extension of that and that is about inclusivity in the workplace in that I think um sometimes there's this negative opinion or this negative presentation that when you're in work you're supposed to shut down half of yourself. I don't know like maybe people have seen that TV show severance. That's that is basically an a um an exacerbated version of what does already happen in the sense that when you're supposed to come to work and you're not supposed to show emotions when you're at work or you're you're not supposed to talk about this. I think that's BS. Um you're still a person and I think you do most of your best work especially in the health and care space if you turn up as your whole person. Um, &gt;&gt; yeah, that sometimes means that maybe you're going to be really upset one day or it might mean that you're in a meeting and sometimes you're going to have a negative reaction and you might be a bit angry. Like we should be designing spaces where it's okay for you to turn up as a full person because that's the only way you design services for full people. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. There's definitely something there about like the more we design these sociotechnical systems where you're confronting like these really intersecting challenges and there of like you know a a legal nature and an ethical nature and a clinical nature and and when we're using you know we how many sort of I don't know I'm not the statistician but how many statistical definitions of fairness can we produce and like actually whose decision is it in the end and and the more people that we have that can engage with those kinds of questions um the better. Um so I just want to have a and I'm thinking I was seeing some of the chat earlier. Um there's a lot of change and uncertainty at the moment and for a lot of people uh you know it's kind of an anxious time. Um, and I really want to hear from you about the the move from the UK to the US and how did you manage I mean did that feel like a seismic shift and how did you kind of manage that that sort of change or perhaps it was just completely chill and you like sailed through it. &gt;&gt; I have never been a chill a day in my life. Chill is not a word that applies to me. Um, so no, the move was not chill. The move was seismic in a lot of different ways. Um I had up until that point never been more than 90 minutes away from my family. Um and then I moved 4 and a half thousand miles in one go. Uh uh it was also massively different in terms of like disciplin like disciplinary context but also massively cultural cultural context. Um &gt;&gt; uh I also am a person who is allergic to uncertainty. I hate it. It's like an absolute horrendous thing. In fact, I think most of my career can probably be tracked to the fact that I don't like uncertainty. Therefore, I don't like not understanding something and therefore I have to understand everything that it is that I'm doing. Um, so from for all of those reasons, the move was difficult uh in terms of how I handled it and why I did it. So, I moved because like I said, um, Professor Luchana Flory was my PhD supervisor. he wasn't who I was working with in Oxford because obviously the Bennett Institute is run is run by Ben Goldacaker but um I my PhD was was Luchano I knew he was moving um and he had originally asked me to come and I had said no in fact I said no three times and he spent six months convincing me and then I said yes um and the reason I said yes uh is because for several reasons but Pierers Keane um professor Pierers Keane from UCL who was my external supervisor um external examiner for my PhD for example said I always tell people to go to the US if they have the opportunity to do it if they are working in the UK health and care system because there is this big myth I think um that the US has solved many of the things that we are grappled with obviously it's a vastly different context in terms of it being private healthcare but there is like oh the US has got better tech and none of it's true um but you don't know that until you're on the other side. So I guess I did the move partly because I was asked, partly because I thought it was a good opportunity to test my assumptions. Um, and then in terms of handling it, there's professional handling and in some ways that part was the smallest part. It was difficult because we were setting up the center. So we were really starting from ground zero. So from like that first six months was us literally putting furniture in the building um and then hiring and all of the difficulties that come with that. But the actual academic side of things was easy because in so many ways um what it gave me was complete freedom. Um so up until that point I was always working within some degree of constraint whether it's because I'm working for Ben and I have to therefore do what what we are doing as this question in the chat about open safety. Yes, that was I was very heavily involved in building that for the first three years. Um or it was because I was with a PhD and PhD is quite is obviously an examined product. Um so the academic side of when I arrived here was like go forth and be free. Um the more personal side of stuff has been difficult to navigate I suppose and how I do that is because I love my job. So that's a safe space for me to retreat into. Um and I stay connected with people at home a lot. Um and that's basically the way it's manageable. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Great. It's really good to hear the sort of like inside track on it because um yeah, but I mean career moves always feel I don't know like they come all at once or I don't know perhaps you're kind of jumping on an opportunity or some perhaps it's something you've like planned for a long time. Um and I don't know we're kind of coming up to the new year, aren't we? And maybe there's a sort of element of like New Year's resolutions and what people want to achieve for the next year or something. Do you do you make plans and goals for your career? And like how do you kind of navigate your um your process of like this is something I want to achieve. These are my ambitions. That's how I this is how I go and pursue it. &gt;&gt; Um yes and no. So at a at a macro level, yes. Um I have goals. Um I'm also uh more ambitious than I think people might think. Um, I think because I present sometimes this kind of like quirky cartoony that that maybe it's which is who I am, but I don't necessarily know that that then means that people understand that I no, I want to be the best at what it is that I do. Um, and so I have goals around that. Um, like my ultimate goal is right now is I want to come back to the UK. I would like my next job was be be some form of associate professor. I would like to run my own lab. That means I need to start applying for grants in order to get money in order to come in order to come back. Um, but in terms of do I have fiveear plans or this type of plan? No. Because I think most of those kind of um objectives come from outside noise. And I think it's really easy to get caught up in, especially if you're especially if you're a woman, to get caught up into this idea of I am supposed to do this by this time. I am supposed to have achieved this by this age. Um, and if you let that noise in, I think it can distract from from the real you. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I love that. That's actually really it's really kind of refreshing and sort of important thing to hear as you know we go into yeah for for what a lot of for what is for a lot of people a a big period of change. Um thinking back to some of the more formative experiences in your career. Um I know from my creeping that um you spent some time working in fintech and I wondered that was obviously a while ago but I wondered what your experience of working in you know with fintech how that's shaped your and if it's shaped your approach to working with AI and healthcare given that they're sort of disruptive technologies have sort of prompted a lot of debate on regulation governance. &gt;&gt; That's a very interesting question. Uh so the fintech stuff was a long time ago. we're talking over a decade ago um at this at this point in time um and I did it because I was working in a consultancy that crossed both sectors. Um if I think back to how it in it played out, I remember when I was did my job interview for the department of health which is is when I went in in 2017. Um the there was a lot of conversation in that interview about what is it that you have learned from fintech that you think is is relevant. So for me there were several there was like a bigger picture and then more specific cases. the bigger picture stuff was um that it had been transformative and it had ultimately been transformative in terms of power to the user. Um so there was a lot of movement at that time. Um there was a lot of regulation that had come in in the wake of the financial crash of of 2008 to allow individuals to have greater control over their finances. So there was a bunch of stuff for example in terms of making it so that you can see all of your money in one place. Um and so that kind of flip of oh we can we can do this. We can we can make it a little bit better for the end user and we can take some of the power away from the big corporates in order to to do this. Um was something I found very appealing and I then started thinking cuz my my first lab my home lab has always been health. Why isn't that working in health? And then I spent basically the last 10 years figuring out why that doesn't work in health. Um but then there were also very specific things tied to that move that also made me think and learn about um health was for example there would that to get the data out of different banks and into one one app for the end user required legislative change. It required the law to intervene. Um and then on top of that it required standards to come in. So you changed the law, then there were data standards, then there was the apps. Um and then on top of that there was learning and what what a lot of what I was doing um as a consultant was how do you design those apps so that they're actually user friendly to to the user. Um and so there was a lot of learning that took away from that in terms of whenever you do these things you can't think about them as being decontextualized. Um and I remain convinced 10 years later that the only way we will get a lot of the benefits that I think we can get out of health data is through legislative change. I think we are tring at the edges. Um but until we have gone back and figured out the legislation, the data standards and the curation and who we are doing this for, we're not we're not going to make any progress. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. That's I think it's such a it's just it feels like and it is a a huge exercise with all of but then that's why it's so important that we don't just have you know statistitians but we have policy makers we have law makers and we have those kinds of um obviously you know conversations happening um internationally as well because there are lots of countries who are well not who but which are doing some interesting stuff around kind of infrastructure as that we might be able to like learn from. Um, switching tack a little bit, um, what have been your career highlights so far given that it's been, um, that long since you, you know, were doing consulting and, um, I'd really like to know what are the moments that you thought, yeah, I really smashed this. Um so I guess I then there are things that have happened as a team and then there are things that I have happened as individuals. So as a team the day that we got access to the full electronic health records via open safely in the middle of COVID was possibly one of the most most emotional days of I think everyone's life. um because it was like holy we we did this but also oh my god the amount of responsibility that now sits because we can do this um is huge. Um so the the kind of satisfaction of seeing that come to fruition um both because we did it so incredibly quickly in in the middle of COVID was um yeah it was quite overpowering and it was quite like wow. Um, but that was a like undeniably a team win. That was not a Jess win. That was a Bennett Institute win. Um, I think when we published the Goldacre review, that was a a more that was a closer to a personal win. Obviously, that was something that Ben and I did together, but it it was an enormous amount of work from me. Um, and that when that went live, that was like, oh, we we did this thing. Um I I don't know necessarily know if I would call it a career highlight because I was by that point like oh my just please let it be over. Um but it was done. Uh so but then in terms of more personal highlights um the absolute uh biggest was when I finished my PhD and when I did when I graduated last year. Um &gt;&gt; the my PhD graduation day was I think possibly the best day of my life. Um I I I'm not sure I will ever beat it. Um and there are many reasons with that. Mo mostly, yes, because it was a I was proud of what I had written. Um, but also because I know um, and we're not going to get into talking about journeys, but because I know what it took for me to get there and because I know who like even 5 years before that, I would have never thought that was possible. I would have thought, no, not you're not capable of doing that. Why would you even dream that it was a possibility? Um so seeing that uh was was yeah that was a big okay here we go thing. Um but I I will say a limitation of myself um and a bad thing of myself is um I don't really sit with wins that often. I tend to be like this happened great what is next. Yeah and actually Chris has just put in the chat too that this conference is also one of the gold recommendations. So we are sitting in one of the impacts of that report. So yeah, you you absolutely smashed it. Um and then we'll dial into Ben's um Ben's talk later on. Um I'm talking of um lengthy reads because I do remember when that first came out and like I always have quite small phones, right? Because my hands are not big enough to have these like I don't whatever iPhone X somethings. Reading all of this PDF on a train um was it was an experience. Loved it. still refer back to it. Um, but thinking about lengthy reads, um, have you got any like book recommendations or like podcast recommendations for um, for anyone facing their, you know, Christmas break thinking um, want to learn a bit more about the I don't know the kind of like work that you're doing or just, you know, good good stuff that you've enjoyed recently. &gt;&gt; Do you take time to like enjoy things like that or are you always kind of in work mode? Um, honestly, I'm almost always in work mode. Um, which is not a lifestyle choice I recommend. By the way, this is not something I would impose on other people. Um, but uh, so there are things that I there are I chat on a lot of podcasts, but the ones that I have been on recently that I really enjoyed that I think the other episodes of which are very good. Um, there's one called the oral apothecary. So, a U R A L. Um, that was great fun. Um it it's really very focused on on the health and care system. Um and they have a quite nice format where it's a very chatty thing, but they also ask everybody uh stuff like um favorite song, favorite book. Uh so you you you sort of get to know the person underneath it and they have this really cool thing where they ask um everybody about their their also like um desert eyelet drug. So and that's something that's either been personal to you or you think has made a big difference in the system. Um, I really like that one. I also really like the artificial human on BBC 4. Um, so I again I've also been on that a while ago, but the episodes are really really nice. Um, they're short. They explore different angles to do with with AI and datification that I think is very nice. Um, &gt;&gt; in terms of books, um, so when my attitude to books is I basically read for a job. Um, and so when I'm then reading a book, if I'm reading it for fun, it should probably be something that is not related to my job cuz I'm doing it deliberately to turn my brain off. But the the book I read most re like in terms of this context that really resonated me with me this year um was this book by Van Kataparum which is he talks about health as a capability. Um, and that was enormously transformative to the way that I think and I would recommend that to anyone. Even if you just read the introduction, you get a lot of what is in there. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, I was reading I feel like it's quite an I mean it's definitely been published a few years ago now. Um but when I took some time out of work to go on holiday a little while ago um I was reading automating inequality which was just and again that's a bit of a holiday obviously um but automating inequality and weapons of math math destruction um which I think are both written by women um uh yeah would thoroughly recommend them to anyone who's interested in this sort of stuff um and also if you guys listening in watching and want to put in your um other recommendations questions into the chat, please do because I've got we've got a Christmas break coming up and um I need to fill my time with something. Um and also please do feel free to put some um questions in the chat for Jess as well. Um &gt;&gt; I should probably be honest, we we since we were talking about Spotify wrapped um before before we started this conversation that according to Spotify, all I do is listen to Taylor Swift. So I I should probably be be honest in that. &gt;&gt; And that would be why your well your Spotify age was 21. &gt;&gt; 21. Yeah. &gt;&gt; And just for full disclosure, mine is 78. I just don't understand. I don't know how many other I mean look, I listen to a lot of reading, but I don't know how much like I don't know. I It's just really like it's really shaken me. Someone said that they've got 80, which has actually um yeah, outdone me in the chat. So, that's great. Um and do you have any New Year's resolutions? Is that something that you do? &gt;&gt; Um yeah, I have New Year's resolutions. My my new my work New Year's resolution is to jump higher. So, uh I feel as though I have now I've been here for two years. I'm two years post PhD. I've done a lot of expanding my thinking and thinking within a framework that was already there and using methods and approaches that I had already done and now I feel a little bit more ready to be do you know what I'm going to be a bit braver um and that might mean jumping further away from the ground or Luchana calls it getting more lost at sea but that that's my um sort of professional aim is to is to jump higher um my uh more personal aim coming back to the conversation around um like handling the change and all of this kind of stuff uh is to try and um not let my entire life be work all the time. There can there can potentially be some some room for things that aren't work and they're small, but that I can make a small room. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I know. I love that. I think it's I just think that there are always sort of like seasons, right, where you're sort of grinding away and I'm sure a PhD feels like that. I don't think I will ever know because it looks like too much hard work for me to pursue that. Um, &gt;&gt; yeah, I don't I don't like I said, I don't I don't fully recommend doing a full-time PhD whilst having a full-time job for the healthcare service in the middle of a national pandemic, but it was uh we did it. So, there we go. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I'm just slightly well I mean absolutely a gasast. I do remember when the when the goldacre review was coming out and I was just we were at the obviously in the health foundation we were all just like how many hours does Jess have in the day because like it's I mean absolutely nuts. Um did you find that like postphd I mean you know people kind of find themselves post PhD like a sort of little bit like stunned right because all of that like work has happened you've had the best day of your life. Um do you have any kind of like useful insights to impart for people who might be feeling that kind of postqualification post PhD stun? So I think in some ways it was nice that I finished and then my graduation was about eight months later. So I had had time to adjust to it not being a thing um by by that point which is probably why it was so joyful um in the immediate aftermath of handing in and doing my viviveror the defense and and and when I passed um that yeah it was complete shell shock uh for several reasons. one because um I passed with no corrections which just doesn't really happen but also I was like that was not what I was expecting. I was expecting to come back to this document and they were like no this is great you're now free for the rest of your life and I was like what um and then I also moved 3 weeks later so it was very like boom boom. Um and so yes, I was a bit shell shocked. Um in terms of and that's a really really really common postphd experience. I suspect it's also a really big a very common experience post anything big of of that that nature. Um in terms of advice, uh I think sit with it. Um so allow yourself to feel that kind of shell shock. um and let yourself go. So we we sort of the we have a we're a very metaphorical working group. I think it's because we are full of philosophers. Um but it like go and do some exploring like you you will you've done something that huge your thinking has been in a box of some size for a long time. Um, so try I guess and not immediately jump to what is my next output, but explore your thinking and allow yourself to go down some completely weird and wacky rabbit holes um until you think, oh, this is now a new fun place that I I want to I want to be in. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I love that. And actually that we've only got a couple of minutes left. Um but I feel like that's quite a nice sort of note to end on. And if I I'll use this as a sort of way to plug just as obviously you've spoken um a lot about finding ways to get your name out there and to you know begin blogging or whatever it is not Twitter formerly known as whatever exmerly known as Twitter um but to you know really like get your insights out there and work and go and like connect with really interesting people. And so just going to take this very cheeky moment to say that um if anyone is really interested in these sorts of topics around equity and sort of um data science then there is a community that um friend of Justice Maxine um and Brio set up called data science health equity that I work um alongside as well and we're always looking for people to um write blogs, host sessions, you know, to um to talk about the work that they're doing or things that they're interested in. Um and so if like Jazz you really want to try and get your name out there and build up a sort of um uh you know online presence then please do come um and find us at uh yeah data science for health equity you can google us. Um Jess any any parting pieces of wisdom or um insights for everyone listening in? &gt;&gt; Oh my gosh. Um no I don't I don't I don't think so. I just think um my my my parting thing is uh just follow what what feels right. Um and uh and keep keep going &gt;&gt; and sometimes get lost at sea. &gt;&gt; Exactly. &gt;&gt; Um and then I think we're waiting for Chris. Hello Chris, you're back. &gt;&gt; Hello. Um well thanks very much to both of you. Uh fascinating uh insights. It's really nice. I always think everybody's got a story to tell, haven't they? in analytics and I think Jess is is unusually you know even more interesting than than all the other um stories that I've heard. Um so really great conversation. Thank you very much. Uh this session is not doing anything for 20 minutes. So audience, if you wish to go to uh the final talk in another stream, then please do uh or go and make a cup of tea or do whatever you will. And we'll be back at 10 to 5 uh with Ben Golder to close the uh conference.