So I'm now going to welcome uh the next keynote speaker to the stage. Uh uh it's uh Manal uh Dr. Manal Bakai is a practicing GP and NHS England's director for primary care and community transformation. She leads major national programs including modern general practice and the national neighborhood health implementation program. Manal advertises government internationally and was awarded an MBE for services of general practice. Her talk is on from vision to action turning the dial on neighborhood health. Please welcome Dr. Pedal. &gt;&gt; Hi everybody. Uh lovely to be here. Uh and thank you for that lovely introduction Chris. [snorts] Um I'm hoping that you can see my slides. Brilliant. Um so um thank you. Uh so I'm going to tell you a little bit about the work I've been doing around uh the national neighborhood health implementation program. So I think first of all just to start off and probably echo a lot of what my colleagues have already uh been saying is that neighborhood health is not new. It's been a policy ambition for about five decades. Um and I have the privilege and my role to visit lots and lots of places that are progressing neighborhood health. But my reflection is that many of them have managed to progress despite of rather than because of the system that we work in. And so while we've had this policy ambition to move CL care closer to home towards more coordinated, personalized integrated [snorts] care, actually what we've seen is the reverse. So we've seen uh resources flow in the in the opposite direction as Lord Dar's report articulated really clearly. Um uh we've seen a over the last decade growth in hospital funding by about 21% but a decrease in community funding by 4%. We've seen an expansion of our our specialist workforce. So hospital consultants again grow by about 168%. But we've seen um a reduction or a shrinkage in our more generalist workforce. the workforce that we're going to absolutely need to care for an aging, multimorbid, more complex population. So, nurses, GPS, um, and so forth. And so, we've seen a 7% reduction in GPS over the last decade and a whopping 50% reduction in our district nursing teams. Um, and so I think I' I would I always like to take a moment just to reflect and and think about well what are the lessons that we can learn from previous large scale change in initiatives that have gone before us that have been trying to drive this same ambition of the left shift. And so some key reflections for me are that um often change or success of the change has been seen narrowly through the lens of the NHS. So very quickly it's rapidly narrowly focused on hospital activity rather than whole person outcomes. [snorts] Secondly um change has been seen as a technical and a linear change when we know that this is um complex. It's adaptive and it's absolutely predicated on trusted relationships and so that impacts the pace of change um and how quickly we can move. Um thirdly, the pace of change nationally hasn't kept up with the pace of change locally. So regulation, performance frameworks, um funding flows, um did not keep up with the hard one changes that were made on the ground. So they were not hardwired in. And so then when you have a change in leadership for example, u it can make it much harder to move forwards and often much easier to move backwards. And then finally, and I'm sure we'll talk about this a lot more here, is data. So, not only do we need data um and data sharing and integrated data sets to work in a more integrated operational manner, but we also need that data to do the detailed work of really understanding what does it cost to shift left? Uh what are the interventions that make the biggest difference? Um and uh you know how do we collectively then see those outcomes that we want to see. Um and so for me we have to take these lessons that we've learned from the past and really embed them in how we move forwards as we start to embed neighborhood health going forwards. I'd just like to say I'm in my practice today and um they have put the light sensor in my room far away from where I actually sit. So I have to keep moving my chair to get the light to turn back on. So apologies for that. Um so uh the urgent case for change. Well, I think we all know why we need to change. Um but actually um as a frontline practitioner, I really do feel uh that this is our last chance to translate ambition uh into action. Um over the next decade, we're seeing a rise in demand and complexity. uh we're going to have 68% of our over 65 year olds um suffering with multimorbidity um uh and we're seeing a rise in um in in long-term conditions and mimorbidity happening at a younger age. We have a widening of health inequity. So there's a 20-year gap in healthy life expectancy between those living in the poorest areas and those living in the affluent areas, most affluent areas. Now I'm a GP in a very deprived part of London and actually that is very much my live reality um for the communities that I serve. We know that population health outcomes has started to stagnate and actually they're starting to fall for cardiovascular disease in men and we know that we're seeing increasing uh rise of dissatisfaction in our workforce. So the last NHS staff survey showed that 41% of NHS staff felt stressed, tired, burnt out primarily from working in a system where they felt disenfranchised, that they weren't able to do their best work, where they were being asked to prioritize task completion over care and connection. And then that's further exacerbated by um an everinccreasing churn of um shortterm initiatives and short-term funding cycles which makes it really hard to embed change. And I think we all recognize the financial pressures we're facing across the public sector. Um currently we spend about 40% of the public sector budget on the NHS. That's projected to increase by at least 0.6% yearonear. So in 30 years that's 60%. it's really unlikely we're going to have the support of our public to spend such a large chunk of our public sector budget um on the NHS alone and and particularly when it does not feel like it's delivering for communities. Um so it does not feel financially sustainable to continue um on this road. And therefore it should come as no surprise to all of us that when we look at uh this data 15 years worth of data looking at emergency admissions while we can see a small um inevitable rise or non-mitigatable rise in emergency admissions related to increasing comp complexity in an aging population. we see an exponential rise in avoidable mitigatable activity. So our most cost intensive resource intensive part of our system there's a huge amount of mitigatable activity and and that is linked to a disinvestment in primary and community services but also really importantly the social infrastructure and community infrastructure um where people live uh which is absolutely critical uh for prevention and health creation. uh the importance of feeling connected to your community, feeling connected to your place and feeling connected to purpose are fundamentals of what drives good health. Um and this is just looking at more data about projections of the future. So I said, you know, I mentioned that a majority of demand that we're going to see over the next decade is driven by multimorbidity and long-term conditions. I absolutely am seeing this as a GP. Um but 80% of multimorbidity starts with eight gateway conditions. And the evidence shows that if we can better manage those eight [snorts] gateway conditions, either prevent them altogether, diagnose them early, or manage them more effectively because we've diagnosed them early, then we can slow down the pace of multimorbidity, which we're seeing start at a younger age. It's more pronounced in areas of high deprivation and in ethnic groups. But also optimistically, there are four key modifiable risk factors that underpin all of those conditions. Smoking, alcohol, physical exercise, and diet. Um, and so if we can start to address these and we have a really good strong fighting chance of bending the curve, but I think we also all recognize that 80% of health is determined outside of my clinical four walls of my clinical room or or the hospital. uh they you know it is determined at home. It's by the wider social determinance of health where people live and so the NHS cannot do this alone. It has to be a partnership approach and the strengths of partnerships is going to be absolutely critical in driving this forwards. And so the national neighborhood health implementation program uh takes a radically different approach and change efforts that have gone before us. fundamentally it recognizes that health is wider than health care and that 99.9% of health happens at home. Um and so really a core component of the program is is investing and building those trusted relationships and those strong partnerships and recognizing the strengths that different partners within a system bring. And that is not just statutory partners. That's absolutely non-stutory partners. the voluntary sector and communities and community leaders themselves. It's a large scale change program. So it's not about piloting and spreading. It's taking the existing knowledge because there is 50 years at least worth of existing knowledge and building on that and spreading that systematically um across multiple places around the country and it takes a tight loose tight approach. So tight on a shared mission and shared accountability, tight on some shared outcomes, whole person outcomes, um, and actively learning from each other, but loose on implementation because we know there's no one-sizefits-all and that these interventions will need to be adapted to the local context. And it's about creating the enabling environment and conditions for change, not just the what um, and the local changes on the ground. And so it's connecting um teams. So we've got 43 sites in our wave 1. Connecting them back to national policy and program teams. So identifying the blockers and the barriers that practically get get in the way from progressing this change and connecting them back up to national policy and program teams to co-produce the solutions while also recognizing there are some key fundamental things that we need to do to hardwire these changes and shift left systemwide properly. things like funding flows, performance frameworks, outcome frameworks, contracts, and again co-producing those with those that are delivering the change on the ground so that we're connecting policy and practice really um tightly together. Um I said that it's outcomes focused and I'm going to come back to that in a minute, but I just really want to stress that we are looking at whole person outcomes. So we're looking at beyond just the service utilization metrics within the NHS but those wider factors that uh that uh are important to people. So going really to the what matters to you conversations and then finally recognizing that health is a horizontal and it is wider than the NHS and the department of health and so working across government. are working with the cabinet office, the office for the um the new office for the impact economy um uh MHCJ, DCMS and others who are all investing in community regeneration, community infrastructure, social infrastructure and therefore being greater than the sum of our parts. And one of the key reflections that the 43 sites have played back to me is [snorts] that they absolutely recognize that this is about a mindset shift before anything else. So this is about moving away from body parts to whole person care but not just looking at individuals. It's also looking at households because as a GP I look after families and households. I don't just look after individuals. These things are all really interdependent. Secondly, it's moving away from a deficitbased approach to one that is strengthbased. Thirdly, it's about moving away from a culture that asks what is the matter with you to what matters to you? Doing with not doing to. And why is that important? Because when I ask my patients, "What matters to you?" I really understand how their symptoms are playing out in the context of their family, their household, and where they live, in the context of their lives. And through that, we make higher quality decisions because I can see more. I can ask better questions. And collectively we make higher quality decisions, personalized care decisions [snorts] about therefore what are the interventions that are going to make the biggest difference to those individuals lives and their famil family's lives. And as we start to see more um as a system, we can be more agile and do better. And as the seeing and the doing fits, that's when we move to valuebased care. And that's really at the heart of the 10-year plan and everything we're trying to deliver. And I just want to say there is a huge amount of motivation and momentum to do this and do things differently. When we put out the EOIs for the NHIP, we received 141 applications from 144 places across the country. That's 83% of the whole country recognized that we need to do things differently. And so we are not just doing the what. This is about shifting mindsets and thinking differently. It's then about doing differently, working differently, and I'll come on to that in a minute. It's about delivering differently. It's about measuring differently. And then it's about hardwiring those new those changes. So um I have as I said been had the privilege to visit lots of places that are progressing neighborhood health. Um and through um structured interviews, visits and then testing with 300 key partners across the whole of the health and care system, we distilled down what the high impact actions were that really helped turn the dial and enable places to see the change because otherwise this can feel quite overwhelming. And there were four key high impact actions. First was using our data, our shared data as well as local community and insight uh intelligence uh practitioner intelligence to identify those adults with long-term conditions who are at high or rising risk of escalating need and hospitalization. It's then about coaching practitioners to systematize a different way of working that shifting mindsets that I mentioned to act help activate people and support them in the co-management of their long-term conditions um working with activating the resourcefulness of individuals, families and carers. And when we ask people about what what uh you know how confident do you feel about your managing your health conditions, your health and well-being, [clears throat] and then we ask them about what are what's the one thing you could do tomorrow that [snorts] would make the biggest change in in activating um uh in in in activating you. 90% of the things that people come back with are nothing to do with the health care system. They are I feel socially isolated. It's my housing. It's my financial instability. Um it's mental health but related to being lonely and and not feeling connected um or connected to purpose. So this really starts to open our eyes to where we need to drive the investment. And of course technology we can leverage technology to really help us do that. Now uh then it's about coordinating care around individuals and neighborhoods. to a named multi- agency team of teams that provide proactive and reactive whole person care 24/7 and we start to rationalize some of the overlapping functions we have in the system as I visited places some places have 70 overlapping functions so while we absolutely recognize that all the funding constraints in our system actually there are opportunities here to allocate our resource differently if we start to see the whole what matters to people and then be able to coord coordinate all of our assets differently. [snorts] And then finally, but really importantly, it's about building those deep community relationships, particularly with those where we've lost trust. And this is a big issue, not just for the healthare system, but for the state and communities more widely, and is key to public sector reform. But how do we rebuild those relationships with communities um where they feel disillusioned by the uh public sector not delivering for what they need? And there are some brilliant there's brilliant work happening across the country. Community health and well-being workers allocated to the 20% most deprived households um knocking on their door. They are trusted. They are culturally competent. they are part of the community but they are also part of our workforce um and they pro provide that bridge um and they help them with all that people with all aspects of their lives but they also then bring them in to see me as a GP when they're worried about them um or where there are worrying symptoms but people don't feel confident to access health care so we can start to do that early diagnosis and early intervention that I mentioned before and also connect people more widely but the what is re what is very important but the how is just as important as the what and so as I said this is about building trusted relationships strengthen partnerships but fundamentally it's about a different type of leadership it's permissive leadership that dissolves the bureaucracy that gets in the way for people doing their best work um and um and um dissolves the power imbalance and allows people to be creative and I have given our 43 sites two rules Don't break the law and don't make things worse. Otherwise, do things differently. Um, and I'm proud to say that in some of our sites, we've got rid of the F-word forms. Um, and sometimes when systems are under pressure, actually bureaucracy can make it worse because we add in more thresholds to access care, more referral criteria, more forms, more process, and that gets in the way of doing our best the best for our patients. And so this is about having that permissive leadership to dissolve some of those those um old habits and shape new ones together. Um but it's also about having that relentless focus on outcomes. So, it's working differently with communities, involving them from the very start, ongoing dialogue, not just one-off engagement, um, and and truly embedding co-design of outcomes, co-desely of services, co-learning together, and having that transparency and accountability with communities. Um and so some of the key outcomes that we're capturing through the NHIP are uh patient reported outcome measures, patient reported experience measures, people's activation, uh staff experience as well as service utilization measures. So outpatient activity, unplanned hospital admissions, length of stay and general practice um activity as well. And why this is really important is that when somebody is socially isolated, when their care is poorly coordinated or they have deficits in their well-being, they are far more likely to end up in hospital through an emergency admission. So we have to look at the whole if we are to solve some of the NHS's most complex challenges. Um and therefore taking that wide whole person view is not just a nice to have. It is absolutely critical to solve the problems that we're trying to solve. And then really I'm not going to go into this in more too much detail, but these are just examples of places that I've visited that have been driving the the high impact actions that I described. Um, and I think it's just to say that recovery and reform, we see them as silos at the moment. And actually, they're two sides of the same coin [snorts] and we have to bring them together. We can't have a phase one which is recovery and a phase two that's reform. They are two sides of the same coin. [snorts] uh when we do things differently, when we work through neighborhood health, [snorts] we see huge reductions in emergency admissions, ED attends, ambulance calls, medicines optimization, general practice appointments. We're reducing pressure on the system, but we also see a huge improvement in people's activation, well-being, and uh their engagement in screening and immunizations that all lead to better population health. So, I'm going to stop there. I think my final reflections are that this is complex work and capturing those outcomes is is a real challenge. It's [snorts] a challenge because um you know this isn't something we've traditionally done. We've made some huge impact nationally with building the infrastructure what we're calling the national neighborhood health integration index where we can capture proms pre person activation and now link it directly at a patient level to a service utilization data. So that's something we would like to work with the analytics community on refining further uh testing and refining further. We have 43 sites across every single system. So I would really value your um collective contribution working with your sites, your local sites to help them move this forwards. The third thing is is that we also need to start linking uh whole person outcomes and whole person interventions so we can start to understand which interventions are having the biggest impact on those outcomes. But like I said, it's not just the what, it's how you deliver those interventions as well and having those what matters to you conversations and personalized care conversations and coaching conversations. So how do we understand whether that's happening or not? And then of course the data quality and the coding to be able to track all of that and the data sharing to track the whole end toend journey is going to be really important. And we're doing a lot of work with um the strategy unit who are our partners in this in thinking then about the counterfactuals and how we identify the right counterfactuals to understand you know what would have happened if we hadn't done this but recognize that the system is not static and it's dynamic and there always new initiatives that are being um embedded and so how we do that is also really really important and then um finally so much of this is behavior behavioral. So to see the macro changes even if we do reduce um um and turn the dial on uh emergency admissions um and some of those metrics for the target cohorts that we're looking at. um we have seen through other you know other data that actually there's a substitution effect and people's thresholds for admission can sometimes drop or actually the the strain of flu virus that year was particularly bad and so there was there was an increase in demand more broadly so I think it's you know it's complex analytical work that we're going to need to do here to really do that detail that I think has hampered us for the last 50 years to drive the F shift. And so really it's an ask for help um and a a connection to our 43 sites to help us really move some of this thinking forwards. Thank you. &gt;&gt; You're on mute, Chris. &gt;&gt; Sorry, I'm on mute. You'd think I've never done this before. Uh thank you very much. Really, really interesting talk. There's lots of questions. We're not going to get through them all, unfortunately, but I will do my best. Um [clears throat] uh here's one. I'm going to try and share them on the stream. Let's see how well this works. Yes, here it is. Do we have a definition of what a neighborhood is? &gt;&gt; Yes. Um so a neighborhood is based on geographies. Um so it's uh first of all it's what communities would recognize as being their neighborhood. It's co-terminous geographies. But we're saying on average a neighborhood is between 30 to 50k. But it's more about the geography and that what and that communities would recognize that being their neighborhood rather than the size because for example there are some neighborhoods in rural areas that are 5,000 and some neighborhoods in more urban areas that are bigger than 50,000. So the number is less important than actually it is what um would be defined by communities themselves as neighborhoods. Um and uh some of the work that's happening between now and the end of the year are places and systems working um together to identify what those neighborhoods look like. And in many areas they're similar to the P PCN footprints, but in some areas that geography doesn't quite make sense. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. Uh here's another question. Um let me just pop it on the screen. How can we do analysis into some of the outcomes we want to see from neighborhood health beyond healthcare use which we often rely on is it is easiest to measure &gt;&gt; um so I mean what we have started to do and I'm not you know we're not we're this is a journey that we're we're on is we so I think the first step was actually building a mechanism to capture proms and prems and person activation consistently across the country. So, we've got that. We've got through the IG um um uh challenges to make sure that we can link that at a patient level to connect that to service utilization data. So, we have a mechanism to take burden away from places. We have a mechanism to do it consistently and we have a mechanism now to link it to patient level data, utilization data. That's the starting point. Um, but we're going to have to continue to refine this. So, you know, there's lots of things that we will want to do to be able to isolate what were the key interventions, for example, that had the biggest effect on activating people. So, increasing person activation. Um, and some of that is going to be really understanding what the interventions were themselves on the ground. So, I mentioned what the high impact interventions are, but there's always going to be a combination of things that's happening on the ground. So coding and what um and this where the partnership working comes in really importantly the kind of clinical policy analytics partnerships because it's about understanding the operational processes and what's happening on the ground linking that to what you know we're trying to do from a policy perspective and then linking that from an analytical angle. So, I'm not sure if that fully answers the question, but I think we're in the process of capturing that information to then do some of that analysis and so I think some of the challenges will arise when we get into the analysis itself. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Well, it's a yeah, it's a conversation as you say. Uh well, we're going to have to wrap it up. There's loads and loads of questions in the chat. Uh so, it's really nice to see all the interest. Do engage uh with the Q&amp;A afterwards if you have time, please. Manal, thank you very much again for an excellent talk. Uh we have now moving into lightning talks in the other streams. Um, I'm not going to read out what they all are, but GDGoo go on the program. There are four other streams with Lightning Talk starting now. So, do go and enjoy that. And then we're going to break between 20 10:55 and 11:15. So, we'll see you all uh soon. Thank you very much.