Hello everyone. Welcome back to the improving flow stream of the conference. Um you're lucky in that we've actually got uh three speakers for our next talk. Our next talk is 25 minutes. Um before we introduce them, just a little bit of admin again to remind you. We've got the attendee chat. Please do uh use that just to drop back feedback, comments, thoughts, reactions. Um but most importantly, we've got the Q&amp;A and we do have time for Q&amp;A. So if you have any questions for our speakers, please do pop them in the chat and you can upvote them and I'll be asking your questions to our lovely speakers at the end of their talk. Um so like I said, we've got three speakers for this um session. They're all from North Umbrea Healthcare Foundation Trust. We've got Richard Bilsborough, Fabian Bean, and Chris Wilcox. And they're going to be telling us about building and implementing a patient non-attendance prediction system using commonly available data. And here they are on screen. Um, and we can see your slides. That's brilliant. So, over to you. Thank you all. &gt;&gt; I am. Oh, we do seem to have just [snorts] uh lost uh Richard. Um Chris has got the slides. I don't know if you guys want to introduce yourselves and we will backstage see if we can get Richard back on. &gt;&gt; Great. Go for it, Fabian. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm Bang. I'm a data scientist at the Trust at North Umbrea. &gt;&gt; I'm Chris Wilcoxen, public health analyst at North Umbrea. &gt;&gt; And I'm Rich Bills. Am I here? Am I live now? &gt;&gt; Perfect. Right. &gt;&gt; Good. Okay. Right. So, our our project was kind of an applied data science project on um on predicting nonattendances in endoscopy. Could we have the next slide please? &gt;&gt; So, just as a bit of background, um our trust covers both Northland and Northside. So, it's kind of if you imagine where Newcastle is, we don't cover Newcastle. cover everything to the to the east and up to Scotland. So, it's quite a varied patch. There's a lot of parts of it are quite rural, parts of it are basically Newcastle, very urban. Um, one of the services we offer is endoscopy. Uh, we we've had a bit of a problem with DNA there. So, we lose about £300,000 a year in lost revenue and then costs on top that we also lose. Obviously, that also affects the patient. If they don't turn up, they're still going to need the diagnostics, but they're getting worse all the time. They're deteriorating. So, our our project was to create a way to a date model that can predict which patients are or aren't likely to DNA and then put an intervention in place for somebody to contact the high-risisk patients and try and hopefully get them into the hospital. Um, next slide, please. So, we'll be looking at the data sourcing. Um, Fabian will be taking you through the the actual analysis and how the model works. I'll be showing you the the front end of the tool that we built. And then Chris will be telling you about his side of things, which was the the actual doing the work with the patient side of things. Uh, next twice, please. So, the first part you need to do with any data science project is get some data, right? Um, for this one, our main source of data was PAS or our patient administration system that has all the appointments on it. For the training data, we obviously had all the outcomes on it. Um, that's both spell and episode level, so you can do things with that. We know everything that's related to referrals is in there. For the past ones, we can see clinical coding things, which we messed around with, but didn't quite work very well for this one. For other ones, it's worked a bit better. Obviously demographics which can tie as you can see down there to IMD nursing home whether the patient's a prisoner the distance between the hospital and where they live things like that we also pulled a few bits from Icarus which is a clinical system they didn't get used in the the actual model they're just straight to the front end it's more contextual type things to be honest um we did play with linking it to Epicure again that didn't particularly add anything so we didn't use it for predictions and fingertips can be added. We've not really messed around with that yet, but it's very possible to do. Uh, next slide again, please. So, the the whole the whole data source creation cycle and Fabian will kind of explain this a little better because of how it's how it works. What happens is the best way we found to do it was to build a small data set, send that over to Fabian to to do the actual modeling and work out all your um relationships, all that. Meanwhile, I'm adding extra things, taking bits out if they're not useful, messing around with maybe certain variables are better as a series of booleans rather than something else, or there's certain certain um outputs that are just wrong. Maybe you want to populate nulls with a value, something like that. whatever's going on. Um, so it's a very kind of iterative process rather than a one and done. And that was much better for me and I think for Fabian to kind of stay on top of it and not be just overwhelmed by everything all at once because there's, as everybody knows, there's an awful lot of data around. Um, Fabian. &gt;&gt; Right. Can we get the next slide? Um, right. So yeah, I'm going to talk a bit about what we found in analyzing the appointment data and how we use that to build our non-attendance risk stratification model. Um, so after cleaning the data that Rich just outlined, uh, we ended up with around 39,000 uh, endoscopy appointments um, for a time period of two years from 2022 to 2024 um, which was collected from five different sites in the trust. Uh, next slide. Cool. So, the overall non-attendance rate for those two years for endoscopy appointments was 3.9%. Um, and that's after excluding cancellations. And in the data we found a number of interesting uh patterns and a few of those I quickly want to uh share with you. Um the first one is the correlation of um non-attendance in endoscopy with previous non-attendances. Um as you can see in the chart to the right um there's a strong correlation with non-attendances in the past and missing an upcoming endoscopy appointment. Um and so here we did look at all types of hospital appointments. Um and we were looking at the past two years. And generally while this might not be terribly surprising you know obviously past non-attendances might be indicative of future non-attendances I think it's still remarkable to see how almost linear this correlation is and that you know with each additional missed appointment in the past the likelihood of also missing the upcoming endoscopy appointment increases. Um and then next we have deprivation um measured using the index of multiple deprivation score. And again we see there's a strong correlation almost linear um and generally going in the direction that the higher the level of deprivation of the post code that a given patient is registered at the higher the non-attendance rate. Um and then lastly an interesting demographic observation. So if we split the data by age groups and by gender um we we obtain groups that have very different behaviors around around attendance. And just to pick out the most extreme ones um for example male patients in their 30s have roughly seven times the non-attendance rate that female patients in their 60s have. Um and yeah, so you know that's just a few examples of things we found and um I guess that shows that there clearly are different patient subcohorts that have very different um I guess non-attendance risk profiles and those types of insights we then used to select variables to go into our risk stratification model. And so um next slide please. Cool. [snorts] Right. So um I'm going to skip over the technical details and explain this at a relatively high level but um feel free to ask any questions in the Q&amp;A later on. Um but so the general aim of our project of that part of the project was to build a supervised machine learning model which estimates the probability of a patient not attending the endoscopy appointment &gt;&gt; um based on patient characteristics and appointment characteristics. Um, and so the probability of not attending was what we then consider to be their DNA risk score or their non-attendance risk score, which is kind of uh one of the central concepts in this project. And so the way we use the historical data is kind of the standard machine learning methodology. So part of that data we use to train the model, which means to fit the model parameters to the data, and the other part of the data we use to test the model. And it's always important to test machine learning models on data that was not used to train the model in order to obtain an unbiased estimate of the model's performance. Um, and the way that usually works is that we pretend for a moment that we don't know the outcomes for the patients in the test data set. Then we run those patient and appointment characteristics through the model to obtain the risk estimates to then compare those risk estimates with the actual outcomes. And um so we tested a bunch of different models and different parameter settings. And if we go to the next slide, we see that the model that ultimately performed best was a model called XG boost. And so in evaluating machine learning models, it's it's quite important to look at different evaluation metrics. Um and you know for every type of machine learning model there's different um evaluation metrics that are kind of appropriate to to the aim of the project. Um I'm just quickly going to talk about one of the evaluation metrics that we looked at. Um and the one that I chose is calibration because I think calibration has a relatively intuitive um interpretation to it. So generally calibration or in our case calibration means that for each patient group within a given risk bin we would expect the average assigned risk for that group of patients to roughly correspond to their observed non-attendance rate and um to see what that means in our specific case um can we go down two slides Chris um so here in this chart we can see the different um risk groups on the very left hand side we have the the patients with the lowest risk. Uh namely all the patients that were assigned a risk between 0ero and 2.5%. Um that's all in all 3,700 patients. And then if we look at the observed non-attendance rate within that group, we find that they have a non-attendance rate of just 1%. And then on the other extreme end of the spectrum, we have the high-risisk patients. That's all the patients that the model assigned a 10% or higher risk of non-attendance to um which is a much smaller group that's only five to 600 patients. Um and in that group the observed non-attendance rate was almost 20%. Right? And so I think that's fairly strong evidence that the model is quite good at identifying different groups of patients that exhibit very different risk profiles. And you know in this case um you know we can identify a group of patients where we would expect only one in a hundred to not show up to their endoscopy appointment and on the other hand we have a group where we could reasonably expect one in five to not show up to their appointment. [laughter] And [snorts] yeah the last thing that I quickly want to mention is if we go to the next slide um explainability. So for us it was quite important to not have a model that just spits out a number but to have transparency. Um and we we try to achieve that using a method called SHAP which basically breaks down a risk prediction into the individual contributing factors that that led to that risk um that risk assessment and maybe show what that looks like slides and I'll pass it on. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Cool. We have the next slide then please Chris and again. Okay. So at this point in the project we've got I've created a big historical data set and given that to Fabian. Famian's then used that to train a model which can then predict given given the factors that he's found a significant he can then predict if we give him a patient's details whether that patient is likely to attend or not. It gives us a a risk between one and 100%. Now we need to transform this into something live which Chris then can can then use. So to do that I use bit it's not quite as as easy as this but it basically is. We changed the dates on this old data set to pick up the future appointments for the next couple of weeks. And then we build some pipelines to take all this data from our on-rem services uh servers. So the back of ps basically drop that onto the cloud that then pops the data up into Fabian's machine learning endpoint and back down. So we have the patients the patients details with the risk attached. Then they go into some tables that PowerBI reads and shows us a nice front end which looks a bit like the next slide hopefully. Yes. Um so you can see here this is the kind of first screen that Chris will be using. So we get by day how many patients there are on each day. Um and then you'll see the table below that graph there. So each trust ID is each person each row is each person. We have two patients there that are their risk is in red. to the two patients who would be calling because their risk is above 10% which was just a number we agreed on that gave roughly gave enough patients for Chris to ring in a day per day. Um there's also some other attributes so whether the patient is a current impatient whether on if they're on premises we ring the ward they're on rather than the patient themselves if the patient has recently DNAed a previous appointment. Um could you just go to the next slide please Chris and then yes the uh whether the patient we think the patient is a prisoner or not is in as a filter because regardless of the DNA risk we need to contact them anyway to arrange the transport with the prison or that sort of things. It's a it's outside of the scope of the model because they just need to be contacted regardless. Um next slide please. Yeah. So we have another page here. So the kind of the grid down in the bottom left is uh the output from Fabian's SHA model. So that gives each patients breakdown of kind of the the internal waitings if you will of why we think this patient is or isn't going to attend up in the kind of blanked out bit there with all the patients contact details so Chris can call them. Uh and then next slide please. And then yeah we also pass some some kind of wider bits of information that we know about the patient. Any comments on Icarus? Any flags on plaz about whether the patient's in a wheelchair or whatever and any other upcoming appointments in case there's a clash? Um, next slide, please. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Great. Thank you very much. So, my role in all of this was to project manage the implementation of the health navigation kind of side of this. So, after the patients have been given their risk scores, someone then needs to actually do something with those risk scores. So it was my job to make sure uh that happened. And so for the duration of this project, I was also acting as the health navigator. So on any one given day, uh we would take the PowerBI report that Rich just showed you there that had all of the patients whose appointments were upcoming with the risk scores from Fabian's model. So we would identify those higher risk appointments using the PowerBI model. Obviously every patient there you could see with a a red risk score. Um they were the ones that we were calling. So we'd identify those appointments and then we would actually try and understand the patient barriers um to attendance. So you could see the SHAP model that Fabul and Rich showed you there. It would actually give some indication as to why that patient had a high risk score. For a lot of patients it was previous non-attendance behavior but it wasn't always. And so a quick glance at that would allow us to understand what particular barriers and any one patient might have for attending their appointment. And then we would intervene with a check-in phone call. So, we would go into the patient details page that Rich showed you there. We take the patient's phone number and then we would give them a ring. And the whole point um of this check-in phone call really um is to ask some key questions. So, will the patient attend? So, we'd introduce ourselves, say why we're calling, and make it very clear. There was nothing to worry about with this call. We just wanted to check if you're aware of this appointment and if you'll be able to attend. We'd ask the patient if there was any barriers to attending. So that could be transport, that could be anxiety or worry about the appointment, it could be difficulty getting time off work, could be anything. We can't always do something about those barriers, but it's really good intelligence for us to find out what those barriers might be. Uh we'd ask if the patient needed to reschedule, which they quite often did need to do, but often patients who need to reschedule just won't call us. So this phone call acted as a just an extra point for that patient to get in contact with us um and change their appointment if they needed to. And then we'd asked them if there was any additional clinical support necessary. Obviously, I'm not clinically qualified, so I wasn't able to give that um support over the phone, but every patient who was deemed did need some additional clinical support uh received a phone call back from one of our endoscopy nurses. The whole point of this phone call then really was what can we do now while we've got this patient on the phone to make sure this patient attends. So the project activity uh once obviously we'd got all the uh the calls done we made 865 outbound calls for 609 distinct appointments for 515 uh unique patients. Obviously some patients there were having more than one appointment during the duration of this project. We made an average of 11 calls a day uh between October the 10th 2024 and January the 22nd 2025. We had a 79% contact rate. So four in every five patients we were actually able to get through to the calls were pretty short really only 3 to 5 minutes. The longest call was about 15 maybe 20 minutes. Some calls were and done within under 2 minutes. Some patients felt like they didn't need any support at all. It was yep I'm coming. No problem. See you there. Some patients needed a little bit more support. Uh we did do a feedback survey for some of the patients that we contacted and 88% of those patients who filled that survey in um said that they found the call helpful. Um, we found it was really, really important to call from a real phone number. And I'm sure everyone on this call has had phone calls from unknown numbers and completely ignored them. Um, we had to make sure that we were spoofing really a a real local phone number. We've done health navigation before where we've used a kind of a generic phone number that isn't a local number and the contact rate was a good 30 percentage points lower. So, if anyone else decides to implement this, it's really important that you got a real phone number. Uh, the patient profile very quickly. So you can see this is the age distribution of the high-risisk and the low-risisk patients. We were only calling the high-risisk patients. We can see there echoing Fabian's charts from earlier that the high-risisk patients had a much much younger age distribution as we would expect. Um and we can also see that the IMD distribution this is quintiles not desiles unlike shown previously. You can see that you know the majority of patients who are in that high-risisk group were in uh IMD quintile one or IMD quintile 2. again reflecting the the non-attendance risk and how that's um correlates with deprivation scores. So very quickly some of our project outcomes we expected to see a non-attendance rate of around about 17% in the high-risisk population. Um and these were our observed nonattendance rates during the lifespan of this project. So for the people we successfully contacted, we achieved a 4.9% non-attendance rate. That's much much lower um than we would have expected based on you know when we looked at the the risk bins that Fabian showed earlier. You know 4.9% is much lower than we would expect for this high-risisk cohort. For the people who we couldn't get in touch with it was 40.5. So there's something really really important there in that the people who we can't get in contact with. It's not just that not answering the phone has some correlation with not turning up to an appointment. There's clearly some data quality issues there around the phone numbers and the contact details we have for those patients. That non-attendance rate is too large to just be down to people not wanting to come to an appointment. There's clearly some issue there that these patients might not know about their appointment. And so there's going to be QI projects that come out of this around trying to improve our data quality around getting in touch with patients. Overall for the whole high-risk cohort, uh the observed not attendance rate was 10.8%. skewed skewed upwards considerably by the fifth of patients who we couldn't get in touch with and their very high non-attendance rate. So sum this project up we reduce non-attendances which was our primary aim from this was reducing some of those non-attendances which is great. We think this is costsaving even after staffing costs if you work out um what Rich said about before. So if you look at the the revenue that we would have brought in from the tariff costs from these um we think we've saved more money than it would cost to actually implement this project when you take into account staffing costs and employ insurance contributions. We believe we've improved the patient experience. Our feedback survey seem to suggest that people like the calls. They'd be happy to receive similar calls uh for other specialties and they found the calls helpful, useful and in some cases help put their mind at ease especially anxiety around this kind of procedure. uh the benefit was felt as well as observed. So it's not just about the numbers. Our clinical and administrative staff reported reduced downtime during the lifespan of this project relating to nonattendances because ultimately if someone doesn't attend it impacts our clinical and administrative staff who've got to sort that out. And so lastly, we would say that this is strong evidence that this approach works. Um we would fully recommend if you're thinking about doing something something like this, you give it a go because we we think it works. And with that I will pass back over to Rich. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Hi. Um that was a brilliant talk. Thank you for giving us that full story and pipeline. What a great piece of work. Uh there's been lots of chat and quite a few questions. So I'm going to share some of those. &gt;&gt; Um this was a a really nice question. So in your opinion, what's the advantage of a Oh, sorry. Let me just share now. What's your um in your opinion what's the advantage of a machine learning approach rather than a conventional regression model uh given this context? &gt;&gt; Um yeah I'm going to going to answer that. I think that's a great question. Um and I feel it is always an interesting tradeoff between you know maximizing predictive performance or going for more simple interpretable approach. Um our rationale was um we chose the model that you know among the models we tested and we did look at regression models as well logistic and polomial regression but um the jump in predictive accuracy that we got from using XG boost instead was you know in in my judgment significant enough to justify going to a more complex model. But um yeah, I I generally also find this is a very difficult question that's really hard to to answer rigorously, right? Because you know, it's hard to kind of weigh interpretability against predictive performance. Um but I would like to say um I think we try to make up uh for that by evaluating the model on a bunch of different metrics and for different patient subcohorts. So that um I think we understand the model that we produced quite well and we're quite confident that it works um as we expect it to do. &gt;&gt; Great. Thank you. Um we have another question um which was sort of about bringing that data back into the model. So once you were sort of calling people would you then add those sort of number of calls made to then attributes for sort of you know future modeling? Um, no is the short question, short answer. Um, so the patient's previous DNA or attendance history goes in. So whether the patient, if you imagine they had two appointments, whether the patient appeared or not at the first one will factor in, but whether we'd previously called them didn't go in. Um, maybe we should play around with that. To be honest, I hadn't even thought about that. &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a it's a very interesting idea. I also didn't Right. &gt;&gt; I guess we would have to collect data on how that changes patient behavior with regards to attending or not attending to then you know retrain the model on it. But yeah, definitely interesting suggestion. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Uh one more longer question and then we'll um wrap up with some very quick ones. Um were there any IG hurdles around uh you said when you were actually ranging people you would ask about uh if they had any barriers to attending as well. or was there any sort of IG hurdles there with the qualitative data stuff? &gt;&gt; Uh, I'm happy to take that one. Um, no. Um, we we didn't run in into any IG hurdles around this. I mean, we've got a we've got quite a quite a good IG team who are always happy to give us plenty of advice when we need it. I appreciate and not everyone might have the benefit of such a large information governance team as we do. Um, but no, I mean that information hasn't been put into pass. it hasn't been kept it whether it could be or not would be important for us I guess but the really that data only lived for the the lifespan of the project and it it wasn't kept or stored or associated with the patients long term so no real um IG issues for us there &gt;&gt; does sound like it was really helpful though in you sort of having that wider context uh really nice to collect that qualitative as you're doing the quantitative &gt;&gt; fantastic &gt;&gt; yeah I mean aggregating that data it really helpful for us to understand some of those barriers to attendance that we've never really recorded information on before. So yeah, really helpful. &gt;&gt; Lovely. Thank you. And then there have been a couple of sort of questions in the chat just around is there any plans to sort of roll it out further and also if the code is available online or if there's any aspects that are sort of open source. &gt;&gt; I can handle the the rolling out uh wider one but uh coding one. Rich and Fabul have to be you I'm afraid. Um, so we've currently got uh an endoscopy navigation program running at the moment. Uh, we've actually got two endoscopy nurses doing it. It's very unusual to have clinical staff doing this kind of work. Um, but at the moment we've got a bit of spare capacity at one of our sites. So we've got two endoscopy nurses um who are calling patients and they're about probably about 170 maybe 200 patients um through that list at the moment. They've been doing that for about 6 weeks now. Um, so we'll be due to evaluate that in the new year, but we expect it'll have been as successful, if not more successful given these are clinical navigators um than our project was. &gt;&gt; Great. Thank you. And yeah, people are very excited about this and they just they want to see more. [laughter] &gt;&gt; And yeah, maybe to quickly comment on the opensource uh question. So currently we haven't really thought about that yet but um it's actually a good idea and I don't see why we shouldn't do that. Um but we are currently writing a paper about kind of the technical aspects of um of this project and I guess maybe as part of that publication it would make sense to also make the code accessible. So um yeah good good suggestion. &gt;&gt; It sounds like there would be lots of interest in it from the glowing responses in the chat. Um so yeah we'll we'll keep an eye out and um yeah and uh if you want to reach out to the speakers as well you can use the participants uh panel to to find our North Umbrean friends and drop them a message if you want to sort of continue that conversation but uh thank you very much again that was a brilliant talk &gt;&gt; thank you thank you &gt;&gt; so we are kind of in the process of putting together a bit of a an information pack about what we did as well so contact us if you want that we've not written it yet but when it's written we'll send it Yes. &gt;&gt; Awesome. &gt;&gt; Oh, and I I would be remiss if I didn't mention that we won a HSJ award for this. I'd be I'd be told off by managers if I didn't mention that as well. [laughter] Yeah. So, &gt;&gt; you got the big trophy slide. &gt;&gt; Win an award for that one. &gt;&gt; Well deserved. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, that's the end of the improving flow se um stream for this morning. Um lunch is now until uh 1:30. Not provided. You've got to bring your own sandwiches. Sorry friends. Um, so the main room is kicking off again at 1:30. Um, and the improving flow stream is starting again at 2:30. So we've got lunch now back in the main room at 1:30 and the improving flow session is starting again at 2:30. So, uh, enjoy your break and we'll see you after lunch.