All right, good afternoon everyone. Uh, I am Phil Wy. I'm head of data science at Department of Health and Social Care and um, yeah, really delighted to be here. Um, and thanks for thanks for the organizing committee for everything everything they've done so far. It's been a it's been a fantastic day so far. Um, great. So, we're talking about improving flow in this stream. Hopefully, a lot of you made the talks this morning as well. Um, so let's see. Have we got the speakers for the first talk ready? Here we are. Craig, lovely stuff. So, we've got first we've got um the title of this first session is transforming urgent and emergency care with real-time intelligence in Shropshire, Telford, and Rekin. Uh speakers today, we've got Craig Love. We've got Christy Das and Craig Kinaston. So, take it away everyone. &gt;&gt; Good afternoon all. Uh thank you very much for joining our session today introducing you to shop yourself from Enrique UC performance dashboard. Uh we're mindful obviously we only have a short 10-minut slot to present. So this will be a whistle stop tour for you all. Um so who are we? So yeah in the pictures here myself Craig L on the left hand side a senior BI lead in the ICB Gary Chin that's with us is the SDW technical developer. Alongside us as well, we've got Kirsty Dus who's our quality analyst and will be supporting some of the chat. So the roles in the project that we have is that I'm the ICBI lead for UEC and also the nagger for Gary. So he has to uh deliver all of our fantastic products in SDW. And with that in mind, he's the brains and the developer behind the UEC dashboard that you're going to be introduced to today. So the challenge that we faced in shopin was growing pressure on our UC services and as a result then the SDWBI team we're commissioned to develop an innovative dashboard for systemwide insights from primary care through hospital urgent care and onwards into community- based care. So what makes our approach stand out? Introduction of timely wide range of data availability and sources including numerator and denominator flows for filtering from daily through to yearly views providing visibility of performance against targets plans and prior intervals for immediate insight and action. comprehensive range across the UEC spectrum I've mentioned which includes prehosp the use of our emergency services inatient and then through to discharge and then also the integration of NHS England's making data count methodology at the core of the product overall these enable our operational frontline teams as service leaders to respond quickly to emergency emerging pressures in our system so our dashboard at its core for so the data format of it is due to the timely nature the dashboard has to utilize unvalidated data feeds however we ensure that's complemented by additional SDW dashboards using published accountable metrics and the dashboard then is monitored and updated on a daily basis and that's around about midday. The framework itself covers metric descriptions, data sources, availability and timeliness, overviews of metrics before moving into performance and trend overview, a dedicated page for our four primary UEC performance measures and then into the use of making data count methodology including SBC charts and adjustable interval periods. This makes our product at the moment quite scalable including internal development at the moment around patient journey and complex discharge and externally to the organization by input elsewhere. So right now I'm just going to flip across my screen just to give you a very brief overview of demo but the pack does contain slides as well that actually will come out to you uh after today's session. So hopefully on screen I'm looking for some nods from my team here. Yeah, we've gone through to the dashboard. Okay, so the move them over there. Sorry about that. So the main introduction page is um metric list. It gives you data frequency, methodology, and ability to slice by the UEC program we've got up here in the metric group and also looking at our primary and secondary drivers. Then through onto our matrix page. This page offers quick insights into data availability and freshness. So we use a clear rag rating system for clarity provides understanding of the metrics up to date with accountable range um acceptable range and concern. So we can see here green dots all representing the metrics up to date. Red dot we've got one there is where we need to challenge with the data flow and then quickly see these ones are available but just slightly out of date. So that allows us operational um review to be able to bring those up to date. The metric numbers overview page delivers a clear snapshot of key metrics and performance status. What this makes this dashboard really key is the ability then to start uh flicking through different date ranges and certainly on this page we've got the metric driver types. So we can monitor against targets. We can monitor against plan where plans are available and then we can monitor against previous periods. So we've got weekend, month, quarter, and previous year to be able to see there. Moving through into our performance summary page. So this page gives insight into track against uh plan where available, the latest metrics and against target and the previous periods. This is where it becomes a bit more dynamic and we can change the interval period that we're monitoring around day, week, month, quarter or even the previous year's time frame. We also introduced then our performance key measures page for the four key performance UVC measures of 4hour performance 12 hours in department ambulance handover and cat 2 response meantime. These charts provide the operational staff with rapid visibility into emergency performance pressures, enable them to enable a swift response and create action against them. The daily metrics page that we created then brings all 112 measures into a trend and overview page to monitor against plan and targets. We're able to split also in some of these by provider, organization and even by specific sites and have data adjustable range with the availability again to drill through to day, week, month, quarter and year on the fly. We then do have two brief pages which are based on weekly and monitor and monthly metrics that start to provide us insights on the likes of length of stay and that NCTR length of discharge length of stay as well as summary uh metrics there. Then we move into the making data count section of the report and this page obviously then provides the summary and instant understanding of assurance and variation concerns. All of these measures on here are subject to 15 data points. But we can then again use the interval periods to see what the assurance and variation looks like against all of our measures against the latest 15 days, 15 weeks, 15 months period. So again gives that insight overall. The icon metrics page just gives the report u the end user the ability to write reports easy just to find out where their metrics align with assurance and variation and again have that interval uh page to be able to adjust them. We then move into the SPC page. First of which is the national making data count one which has the fixed dates applied to it. But then for comparison, we've also included what is commonly referred to as the Western Australia date adjustable visual and again allows our end users then to create a bespoke range of report using that month, week and day uh approach. Finally, we move into the SPC comparison. So these were kind of designed for us to have quick learnings for our four main um four main UEC core measures and then for the end user to be able to create quick reports and quick insights on their performance and their statistical variation and also then we have a dedicated quality page which is increasing and then the ability then to build a bespoke uh SPC comparison page. So, I'm mindful that is a whistle stop tour um of our dashboard. I'm now going to go back to our into slideshow. There we go. And over to Gary for our technical aspect of the dashboard, please. &gt;&gt; Just want to check everybody can hear me. Can you just give me a nod on the screen if you &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. Right. Good afternoon, everyone. Um just a brief overview of the tech that's behind this solution. Um as you probably imagine, there's a lot of provider uh involvement invol that makes this dashboard possible. Uh we request the providers submit their data via a shared space hosted on SharePoint. Uh we then ingest that that data into a single Excel file using Power Query. We've then got a SQL server integration services package which automate which automatically refreshes a power which executes a PowerShell script to automatically refresh the Excel master file and then executes various other steps uh to perform the extra transform and load process into our on premises SQL server. Um as part of that process because the data is unvalidated we check back three months um to make sure that there hasn't been any changes to the data. If there has we will update that data retrospectively. Uh data is then ingested into our PowerBI solution and structured using a star schema approach. Um data gateways have then been set up from a PowerBI service to enable us to automatically refresh on a daily basis. The final note from me um the data is built using a bottom-up approach. So we load the data into um the solution on the the lowest level possible. So we'll upload it onto a daily basis where we can and then roll it enables us to roll us up roll it up to a weekly, monthly, quarterly as Craig mentioned before. We also load it on a provider level to allow that drill up to an overall system uh so we can use overall system view for comparison. &gt;&gt; Thank you Gary. So finally the one from me the results have been so key to the benefit of the faster smarter insights uh for that sh systemwide shift towards datadriven action. Uh the dashboard itself has had recognition received from the national and regional teams and we have collaborated with the making data count on its approach and the model that we have. The dashboard has also played a pivotal role in supporting the ICB's exit from national oversight. And then finally, but no means least, a fabulous quote down there from our deputy chief delivery officer in STW around the dashboard, how he's used it, and certainly the bottom line for me empowers all of us to self-help on UEC operational data requirements. So, this is where I come over last side over to you for any Q&amp;A, but by all means, please get in touch with us down uh if you'd like to find out further information about the product that we've shared today. &gt;&gt; Thanks very much everyone. That was super interesting, amazing just seeing seeing you guys really get this into down into operations is great. I'm one of those people who sits a long way from operations and so it's really really exciting to see this. Um, we've got a a question on impact that you've just somewhat answered and there's a question here about also any documents available. So, just wondering if there's any documentation available about this project, people wanting to follow up. Um, we haven't got any documentation that we can directly share, but one of the approaches we've taken is is by meeting our colleagues from across different systems across the patch. I did mention in the presentation it is scalable. So some of the approaches that we may have taken in regards to what well the fundamental aspect is getting the data is key building it from the ground up as Gary mentioned and then utilizing then some of the services available such as the making data count that gets built into the background but technical solution obviously is Gary's area and then certainly I'd be able to support from the kind of operational uh input that's required to build it. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. And we've got we've got a set of questions from Amy which um match the ones on my list. So we're let's go let's go into these. Um so so first is the Amy's asking is the dashboard available to all senior decision makers across the ICB and what's the feedback been? I guess I'd add on to that. Um maybe you can kind of just just make a bit more tangible for us what situation this dashboard's being used in. So who's looking at it? Where are they and and what decisions are they making on the ground when they're looking at it? &gt;&gt; Okay. Certainly. So the original ask was stood up as part of the tier one escalation. um that shops and RA in for UEC um reporting um they needed a near live operational data for for decision- making to understand what the impacts were. So we started building it from that point and it was utilized daily for those operational core. You saw some of the key and the core UEC measures that existed within it. From there then we've started to roll it out across the system. So we have UEC um employees that are either in exec or even in operational status across the system that have access via a role-based access platform for PowerBI. And we even also have that rolled out for access to some of our NHS England colleagues including the regional uh UEC teams. So we do actually make that available for those insights. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. And then uh second part of Amy Amy's question um is it whether you've had any data sharing limitations because it's quite a big data model you've built there. So yeah any limitations on data sharing and so on. &gt;&gt; Uh we have to remember that for first and foremost the data is unvalidated. So we have that as a warning across the whole dashboard. But because we use uh sitrep style data that flows into the dashboard, it has quite a bit of granularity, but there's no information in the background that's generally shared about a patient or anything like that. That sitrep star reporting and the engagement with all of our provider colleagues means that basically we we were happy to share the content and the delivery output from it. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. And I suppose let's make this the last question, but on your I mean you gave us the sort of qualitative description of how this of the progress you've had in UA UEC. Um but I wonder is there any sort of um do you have any analysis on how more specifically how the use of the dashboard has helped improve your ICB's performance? That one's from Amy again. &gt;&gt; Okie dokie. Um so so thinking around the core UEC measures, one of the aspects that we certainly focused on was around the ambulance work. So absolutely we could see fundamentally when the likes of ambulance handover times might be increasing how that would impact on response times and how the impact then around a maybe four hours in department etc would actually be impacted because it goes into the flow through the hospital as well. Then we can see the correlation or or kind of the alignment to the likes of uh long length stays in hospital or certainly whether there's any delays in discharge coming out the back end of it. So literally all of those aspects then are seen and taken into account to give that overall view. Hopefully that's answered it for you. &gt;&gt; Fabulous. Thanks very much and a big hand for everyone. This is the end. We've got to the end of this slot. Um just that was super interesting. Great start to the session. Um and hopefully you're all around for the rest of the conference if people want to follow up. So thanks very much uh for sharing sharing the dashboard there. And I believe we've got our next speaker ready. So,