Welcome everyone. Uh welcome to this part of the program. Delighted to see people. I can see everyone's uh coming online after the uh main stage presentation by Penny Dash. My name is Sean Evans. I am deputy director for the local knowledge and intelligence service with the office for health improvement and disparities and delighted to be chairing this session today. Um we this is one of the lightning sessions. So we've got a really uh enticing uh sounding presentation from Chris Beely, head of data science and Karen uh Bradley, principal consultant from the strategy unit. So they should be joining us any minute. Um thank you. I can see Karen coming online. Hi Karen. And Chris is there. Just a reminder, please do put your questions in the Q&amp;A and I I think there is an opportunity to uh if someone's already asked the question, you can click on it to like it. So please do that. Uh because we'll hopefully have a little bit of time at the end for to pick up a couple of sessions. Uh at which point because we've only got 15 minutes, I'm going to hand over. Is it Karen who's kicking off? Oh, thank you Sean. That's a lovely um uh welcome and hello everybody. So um um I can't remember the exact title of our u our chat. It came from the fact that um uh Chris and I program and the roll out of a model. Uh the capacity model um using new hospitals and uh and Chris do a bit of a um interview kind of chat to make it little no slides away. Um so thank you all very much for joining us and I'll ask uh Chris to kick off. Oh, &gt;&gt; so Chris. Oh, you're on mute, Chris. You're on mute. Sorry about that, everyone. It was working beautifully until I joined the stage and then I lost all sounds. I have no idea what Karen just said. So, I'm sorry. I'm going to just crash straight on as if nothing happened because I think that's the best way. So, uh, Karen is here to talk about her work, uh, with the new hospital program, uh, demand capacity model that we've been working on for two years together. Uh, I'm just going to give a very, very quick reflection on the context in which we were doing it. Um, and then I'm going to just have a bit of a chat with Karen, ask her some questions. So, basically, I was working on this um, program for a little while before Karen joined. Um, everything was all idilic and quiet for a while. We were just tinkering, building stuff as analysts do and then we got to delivery phase rolling out with lots of hospitals and that it became very difficult from an operational point of view to keep calm and carry on. Um and that is where Karen joined us and that's what we're going to be talking about. So I'm going to ask you the first question now Karen um after the context. So what did you notice coming into this project and what specific approaches did you adopt as a consequence? Um uh so I have a risk um too much. So Chris is going to be quite brutal with me and shut me off when I've said too much. But yes, so so um I knew program, um I was somebody else was rolling out the model to us rolling out the model. Um we went from be tested with one person with one trust to can you roll seven trusts. Um and when I was asked to operationalize the delivery um I very quickly realized I'd got some really stressed um internal people uh really worried about um the readiness of the model but also I re there was some really unhappy out there as well. So um a client this was the this was the difficult thing with the uh new hospitals program. The client is new hospitals program. So NHS English type folk. Uh but actually the people we were going to be working with hospital trusts who who I've spent many many years um trying to agreement to build a hospital. So I recognized that they were probably quite unhappy but also they might not welcome us. there was there was going to be no red carpet in and saying, "Hey, let's use this standardized demand model." So, I recognized that. So, so knowing all those things and knowing that that um um the way we were and the way it wrong um we were going to forgiveness quite and so um and also a group of people want to play very much with us. So we so I I decided that um the way to manage this process was high humility um kindness um as a team we needed to create a minimumation because the 7th of December live and we'd got seven trust to train um start saying no to to things because um I knew we'd only got seven weeks to get delivery focused and um and I need re had to renegotiate the delivery of you know no we can't roll this out to 27 we're going to have to do it in sections etc etc and I also recognize I am not I am analyst and I am not a data scientist um so knowing that knowing knowing that my my skills is my skills are around oper delivery about how hospitals work so um created a tripartite leadership team so myself Chris Jake Parsons from an analytics and the fact that this work manually for years uh the demand and the capacity of a hospital and so I recognized the three of us had to come together for all decision- making I was not each of us none of us individually was uh capable of making all of the decisions so um and so that that those were the um of the approach I took. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So I'm going to we're going that's a very nice segue actually to the next question which is how did this project differ from work you've done previously and what approaches to project delivery did you adopt as a consequence? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, thank you, Chris, because um I'm I like to do things in a very inclusive way and to hear everybody's views and and to to take kind of like my way through something by understanding the needs or requirements. In this situation, I had to become a dictator um with laser focus. That was my laser focus was um our job was to use get the people to correctly and produce a description of what they did full stop. That's what and so throughout this process that's what I had to focus on. We'd got a minimum specific that Chris that you promised that we were going to deliver to. Um you and I knew where the edges of um uh of what we could and what we might not deliver. So we didn't overpromise. we just said this but we also knew that we would it would improve. We knew that feedback. We knew that we were speaking with experts. So, so there was this kind of like I because it was it was chaotic. I had to create um sense out of the chaos. So being the the person who said no, this is what we're doing. This is what we was was the approach I had to do. And that wasn't something like I said that I was used to doing. I also had to say no a lot. I had to make really difficult decisions um and work out what was critical got to do and what was a nice to have and therefore I will have frustrated many people many of my colleagues many of the trusts by just saying no um but that was to ensure that we delivered a worked um and then we could open it up. So it so uh after about 3 months um of us building confidence, building knowledge, experience, getting feedback, I was able to be less dictatorial and more open. But still we had limited budget, we had limited uh time. Uh there was a number of challenges that we faced um along the way um both technically, relationally. Uh so so some of that kind of laser focus had to I had to keep going with it. That was my job to keep us on track. Um open things up as much as I can change, you know, recognize that things would change, that we will need to do things differently, adopting those changes as we went along. Um constantly changing our our um trajectory, but with a single goal of use, use the model correctly and um and a description of what they did. Yeah. Well, that's another beautiful segue. I feel like we practice this talk a hundred times, Karen, because of all the great segus you given me, but I that's not really true. Uh, what are some of the challenges with within the project that relate to feedback loops and decision- making? So, um I think it's fair to say we were all to uh deploying a uh what was a piece of software um and and um and recognizing that lots of people suddenly wanted and improvements and we and we either oh sorry also that li we got limited people limited from a what skill had but limited also for focus on at once. We didn't have a neverending supply of datists. We didn't have a neverending supply of of um analysts to go and test things out to to uh to build prototypes to try things. Um and everybody had a hundred wants. they all had from our directors to NHP to the clients um to the trusts to the people that we were working with on a day-to-day. Um and so and so very quickly we clocked that overwhelmed very quickly. Uh and so uh very quickly um Chris you and I we then went about a place a prioritization process. How do we prioritize the work um that's coming in? And um we and we we couldn't have a set criteria that we could just employ because of the political nature of the uh hospitals program. The the nature of the hospital's program all learning it as it went along and um and so things were constantly changing. So had to we had to create this multid-disciplinary team of makers where we took in what was going on politically. We took in going on uh with the in a credibility level. We took in what was going on at a people in us trying to work with people but also skill set. And we had to keep flexing to that. Um because one week it would be about our skill set availability and just going no everybody we we can only one thing to actually if we don't change if we don't sort this one thing out really importantly we will use we will lose credibility and we were constantly juggling that process. Um and now we're using it um um to how we do all of our science work. So, so we've taken the learning from um from just working purely on a on the new hospital program and how that helped us make decisions. We've taken it and we're now applying it in a broader sense across the strategy units requirements of data science. So, um and that's been the joy of this is the learning that we've done collectively, the the the shared humiliation that we've gone through going, "Oh, I got that wrong." Or, "Oh my god, did we do well?" And what was it about it that worked well? and then applying it to the rest of our work. Um, uh, chaos happens. Um, off there, Karen, you leave two minutes for questions if that's all right. &gt;&gt; Yeah, great. I told you everybody that you was going to have to be really hard with me. Uh that that was a really fascinating and I'm so sorry that we've got to cut you off because really we could have spent we could spend so much longer um learning about the project and and I had one role as chair to introduce the title of the session. So apologies for that failing right at the outset. So I'm just having a look as it says we we're almost out of time. Um, but if if I can pose a question to Karen, um, if if you know, what would be your sort of one take-home message for others sort of facing a similar kind of challenge? I mean, they clearly really really fascinating sort of learning from the project, but if you had to sort of put your finger on one thing for people to take away to consider, and that's a really hard thing to throw at you. &gt;&gt; No, it's good. It's a really great question because first of all, stop and observe. See what's going on. Don't make judgments. Don't jump into things thinking and if someone says jump, don't ask them how high. Stop and ask why are they asking me to jump? What is it about this? What is the critical thing that I've got to deliver here? Because it it was it it was chaotic. So I had to create the sense and I had to create the rules um to apply in this situation. And so and so and I and I owned that. Uh, so there's something about my experience and age and all the things that go with that Sean and the fact that you've got 30 years that I was bringing into this, but I would always say stop and observe what's going on first of all. Work out what you're absolut being absolutely clear on what your delivery thing is. It's absolutely and then don't expect to know all the answers. And I think the humility or or the other way of describing is compassionate leadership. I just think they are critical in a in the space of complex system or complex change or complex problems because because if you go in there telling everybody you are the expert, there will be always someone who who knows more about it than you and and so and so um go in there knowing that and embrace their knowledge, embrace their understanding. Um when you're able to take your foot off the dictate do you know I I had to do that and it was really uncomfortable. So it's like get comfortable being uncomfortable, observe, and then um uh humility and compassion. &gt;&gt; That is a fantastic summing up. Um and say presumably if people wanted to learn more uh you'll be around in the conference people can look at reach out and I'm guessing there's probably also information about it on the strategy unit website as well. Uh I think that was an absolutely fantastic presentation. Um, uh, Chris, I don't know if there's anything that you want to add before we close. &gt;&gt; Uh, no. So, we're going into a break now, so I'm going to, um, shut us down for now. So, we'll be back at 20 11. So, thanks Karen for your insights and thanks Sean for chairing. Sean will I believe be back chairing after the break as well. So, we'll see you all at 20 11. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thank you both and thanks everyone. See you after the break.