Right. Hello everyone. Um, yeah, as I just said, so we're joined now by Evelyn Greavves who will be uh talking about estimating MMR up vaccine uptake in Birmingham and sol other uh challenges and solutions. So over to you Evelyn. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Hi, I'm I'm Eivelyn. I'm an analyst in public health at Birmingham City Council and yeah, I'll be talking about estimating MMR vaccine uptake and I've sort of framed it as challenges and solutions. Uh you can decide for yourself at the end how many solutions there are in there. Um and I've given myself a lot of slides so I'm going to have to talk quite quickly so I apologize for that. So just for context um MMR coverage in Birmingham and Solhill or Bol um is at an all-time low or certainly MMR1 coverage at 5 years you can see here in 2425 was below 88% and it's been decreasing at a faster rate than the rest of England and for MMR2 coverage we've had a slight uptick um in the most recent year uh but still significantly below the England rate and because of this uh unfortunately measles outbreaks are increasingly an issue here particularly in Birmingham we've had an outbreak this year where when which is when this work took place we've had fairly serious outbreaks in previous years as well and there's therefore this need to identify populations with low MMR uptake so we can appropriately target activity like vaccine clinics and communications around um sort of encouraging people to take back take up vaccinations um and when I talk about populations I'm really talking about three things so there's geography so where in Birmingham and Syill people live there's ethnicity and age group as well. So those were the three things we were most interested in. So the first challenge I'll talk about is data sources. Uh and the main challenge really is there's quite a lot of them and it's not always easy to get access to them. So I'll talk through uh all the four main ones. Uh and hopefully give a bit of summary of them. So the first one is cover which is stands for cover of vaccination evaluated rapidly. Uh that's a publicly available data source. So you can go online and download it. It's published on a quarterly basis and then there's an annual summary uh as well. And in terms of MMR, it only has information about uptake at age two and age five. So, it's not very useful um outside of those age groups. Um it also only has information about uptake at GP practice level and then at sort of an aggregated local authority level. And there's no information about ethnicity. So, in terms of what we were interested in in terms of this analysis, it it wasn't that useful and we didn't use it. The next one is inform which is uh published by the UK health security agency or books. This one is not publicly available. You have to jump through quite a few hoops to get access. I think being in an outbreak in an outbreak scenario helped with that but it is possible to get access to it. Um that's published on an annual basis and it's got information about people aged 2 through 30 and each of those ages individually. So uptake age 2 and age three etc. Uh but it is only at a GP practice level. So there's nothing else in there and there's no information about ethnicity. So it's useful, but it's not covering everything you need. There's also um data from the FTP or the federated data platform. That's another one that's not publicly available. You have to jump through some hoops to get access. Um and many of you will know the FDP is FTP isn't just about vaccine uptake data. It does all sorts of things. Um but certainly within Birmingham Sohole there's an MMR dashboard that has vaccine uptake data on it. I believe what's available on FDP varies quite a lot between areas. So I'm when I talk about FTP I'm just talking about what's available on the MML dashboard in Birmingham and Soly Hill. In theory that's near realtime data. It should update daily. Uh it's got information about people age 1 through 26. Again you can see all of those ages separately. And it's got in data at lots of different levels. So you can see GP practices, PCN's, LSOA which is very useful in terms of uh geography and local authority of course and there's information about ethnicity as well. You can filter by ethnicity. So that's ticking quite a lot of boxes. And then finally there's CHIS which again a bit like FTP um so CHIZ is child health information system uh it does all sorts of things. It's a way of bringing together lots of different data sources about children children and their health. Um, and this is one that even as an analyst, you can't get direct access to. Uh, you have to submit, certainly in the West Midlands anyway, you have to submit a a request for a report and then you get that report back. Um, so again, at the time you receive that report, it should be near real time. It has information about children, so 1 to 19. And we asked for it to be aggregated in lots of different ways, but GP practice, LSOA, school, local authority, and ethnicity were some of the things we asked for. So those are our data sources and in a moment I'll show you how we used some of them. Um but the real point of this section is there are lots. It's quite confusing. You can get access if you need to and the more you have access to ultimately the better. The next challenge is denominators which will become clear. So some of those sources include a denominator and the denom denominator in this case is the number of eligible children in a particular group. So this uh funnel plot is made using data from inform so GP practice level uh and you can see on the x-axis we have our denominator the number of patients at each practice in this case turning two to four so nursery age children each of the points is representing a GP practice here uh we've got the y-axis with the proportion of patients who received zero doses so again we need the denominator for that so we can do the number who received zero doses over the to total eligible And then we've also got funnel lines indicating the sort of acceptable variation around the mean. And then all of these red dots that are falling above those control lines um have uh zero dose uptake that is lower than we'd expect. And you can either frame it as they're underperforming or they need intervention. Um they need more support. However you want to look at it, these are the practices that the ICB will want to go away and look at. Uh so because we have that denominator, it's really easy to just immediately not immediately with some some manipulation turn that data set into a really useful funnel plot that's going to be really informative and helpful. Other data sources don't always have the information you need. So this map is using data from FTP on or from the FTP MMR dashboard on the number of children aed 4 to 17 who received one dose of MMR by LSOA. So we can see all of the LSA's marked out there. The problem is that that data does not doesn't have information about the number of children who received zero doses of MMR and it also doesn't tell us the total number of eligible children by LSOA. So knowing how many received one dose is not that useful in terms of knowing who's unvaccinated and we don't have a way of working out who is unvaccinated using FTP. So what we were able to do was use some um these are ONS population estimates. So combining data sources uh so subtracting the total number of children in the LSOA. So subtracting the number of children who received one dose from the total number of children to get the number of children who received zero doses. The problem with this if you look closely you'll see that on the scale there are some LSAs with a negative number of children who received zero doses. And so those areas where there were more children who received one dose according to FTP than there were children who lived there according to the ONS population estimate. And this is because we've mixed and matched data sources. We're using estimates. They're a bit out of date. Lots of different reasons. But it kind of throws the whole rest of the map into question because if those areas are wrong, then the denominators may might be wrong in the other places, too. So we've sort of come up with a solution, but it's not a great one. And you can turn that into a percentage, but you have the same problem. you get a negative percentage. It doesn't look good. We're not sure how accurate that data really is. Unfortunately, I don't have an overall solution for that from FTP other than we're trying to get them to add the total number of eligible children. Um, however, it didn't matter in the end because then we got our data report from cheers from the child health information system. This also doesn't have a denominator and it doesn't tell us how many children were eligible in this case by LSOA, but it did tell us the number of children who received zero doses by LSOA. And actually, in terms of an outbreak scenario, we're trying to identify areas with the greatest need. We probably want a number rather than a percentage anyway. So, I guess the point here is that having access to all of these different data sources meant we were able to use them in the most appropriate way. Um, so there obviously, as I said, as you saw, there are ways of trying to get around it. They're not always ideal, but the more data sources you have access to, the more likely it is you'll be able to answer the question that you want to answer. Uh, in my last couple minutes, um, my third challenge, it's sort of separate to the others, but it does link in, is coding issues. And I'm not talking about the coding that I did to create those maps. Uh, I'm talking about vaccine coding. So, they've basically got to be coded correctly. So if you imagine a child receives a vaccination um that vaccination event is coded into their records on the GP IT system and then from there all of all four of those data sources I've talked about pull out of the IT system and use it to work out what proportion of children are vaccinated. Um some of them do that directly. So Inform and FDP and CHIS do that directly. Cover for the most part pulls out of CHIZ. Uh but all of them rely on that system being accurate. If for some reason that code that event is not coded properly then that child appears unvaccinated to all four of those systems even if they have actually received a vaccination. And where this becomes apparent is here for example another one of these funnel plots. You can see we've got a practice here where 85% of primary age children at that practice appear to be unvaccinated. And that's 85% of 600. So it's not just because it's a really small number of children. Um, and it seems very unlikely that those children are truly unvaccinated. It seems much more likely that there's been some issue at that GP practice. Um, so really just to flag um that those errors propagate through all of the data sets. So just to close because I want to have some time for questions. Um, different data sources have different strengths and weaknesses and as I said the more you have access to uh the more likely is you'll be able to answer your question. uh and access to that data is possible. I obviously didn't have time today to go into how you do that, but you're welcome to message me if you want more information about that. I may be able to help. Um also being aware of anomalies in vaccin coding and how it affects all those data sources is really important when you're working with this kind of data because it is it it is likely to affect it. Um I also just at the end I just want to thank um Carol Chhat at UKHSA uh who guided this work uh and without it I definitely couldn't have done it and Leon at the NHS Birmingham and Sol ICB he's head of IMS and backs and his extensive knowledge of uh vaccine coding and all the different data sources was absolutely invaluable. So thank you very much to both of them. Um I'll take some questions now if anyone has them. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Y great thanks. Thanks Elen. Um so a couple of questions in the chat. Um so CLA has asked um kind of two questions really. Uh got link though is first one is is there a limit to the frequency which you can request CHIS uh CHIS data extracts and then secondly have you found FTP useful easy to navigate for PHM purposes? &gt;&gt; Um I don't know about the CHIS report requests. I'm sorry. Uh it took us a long time and I there were various reasons for this. It took us a very long time from requesting to actually receiving the report. Um I don't know exactly why that is. Um but yeah, I don't know if there's a limit. Um FTP is somewhat useful. Um some of the data is easily understandable, some of it not. The MMR dashboard is quite useful apart from the fact that we couldn't do the LSOA mapping very well with the denominator problem. Um but in general the the data has been quite useful. So mixed. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Great. Thank you. Yes. I think it's a comment from Jeremy was saying something similar that not too good at national level PHM but better if regional teams out data there as well. So that maybe help people. Um thank you very much. Um I think there any other questions in the uh chat and we're kind of at the end of the session time anyway. But thanks again for that talk. That was really great. I appreciate it. Um, that's the end of uh the morning session now. So, we've got a lunch break until 1:30 and then coming back at 1:30, the uh third keynote will be the next kind of talk in the main session room. But, um, thanks to all of this morning's speakers for their talks. They've all been really great, really interesting. Um, and thanks also for all the attendees for your, uh, contributions, your chat, and your questions as well. Appreciate it. Thanks everyone.