Hello everyone. Um, I hope you can hear me. Um, I hope you had a good break as well. We've just had some technical gremlins and we've had to go over to sharing a screen share of a team's call instead. Um, but thanks for your patience while we work that all out. Um this session is a panel discussion on palative care service planning giving choice at the end of life. I'm pleased to introduce our chair, Professor Ian Athetherton, who will lead today's conversation. Over to you, Ian. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much and thank you to all your colleagues for sterling work in sorting out our um technical problems. Yeah, delighted to have the opportunity to um chair this session. I'm um Ian Averton from Edinburgh API University, professor of nursing data science. Uh I'm a registered nurse. A big part of my work has been around end of life care, paliative care and um uh a lot of my research likewise as well. So delighted to have the opportunity to present this session. We've got three um people who are going to contribute to um these discussions. Um absolutely delighted to have my colleague Yan Sav. Um Yan Sav is a research fellow uh in health data science works along with myself at Ender AP University and as part of ADR Scotland. Um he's got a range of research interests. They all um revolve around the use of large data sets to collect routinely collected data by public um bodies um for for research um into public health. Uh and he's interested in areas including mental health, childhood adversity, suicide prevention, alcohol, drug use, and educating the public about um the use of data and end of life care uh being a a major one as well. Delighted also to have Fiona Williams. Uh Fiona is a clinical nurse specialist in paliative care. Uh she's got 25 years experience working in that area. Majority of which has been as a community practitioner um in the west coast of Cumbria, beautiful part of the world. Um currently she's based in hospital uh and is enjoying her second year of the econment bringing research into underserved communities within Cumbria. She's got a degree in health studies and a masters in medical ethics and law. Um and thirdly um we have uh colleague here Grace Rowley. Um Grace is a consultant in paliative medicine in North Colombia. Uh originally trained and worked as a GP before converting to paliative care having developed a passion with a speciality working in hospices and as a paliative care mentor in Tanzania. and she's completed a master's degree in medical education. So that's our panel. Um what we're going to do is I'm going to in uh ask each of our panelists to um talk for five minutes um on um the topic of um um paliotative care service planning giving choice at the end of uh of life. So uh I'm going to start um with Fiona. Fiona, do you want to have your five minutes? Oh, I just need to unmute yourself. &gt;&gt; Apologies. Um, yeah, as to talk about palative care, service planning and giving uh choice at the end of life. I think for the first thing for me as think why is choice important? Because choice is really important. So that's kind of what I want to start with. Choice really matters. If we don't ask the questions, we will have absolutely no idea of what is important to people and how we then proceed with the care we need to give. Cancer, uh, endstage heart failure, endstage respiratory disease, frailty and people with multiple co-orbidities, all these conditions are incredibly impactful on your life. It also limits the options that are open to you, the choices you make and it reduces independence and that or it can be taken away completely and that is that is where we sit really with all this. It's essential we ask people what's important to them especially when they come towards end of life. At this time um there are many things that are being taken away from people when they're coming towards end of life like their independence and this gives something back. It actually provides people with a little bit of agency again and the opportunity to be heard, which is massive. To be honest, you're often surprised what you get when you ask what's important to you. I've had patients that refuse to come into hospital because there's nobody to look after their cats despite needing you to. So, you're never quite sure where it comes to. So, um Ian's asked to put along a couple of really brief case studies. So I thought the two that I wanted to um discuss with you where the decisions I thought were about to be made weren't actually. So we got a lady Helen who's 59. She was admitted with jaundice and was found to have new diagnosis of pancreatic cancer requiring stances. She'd just come out of a long-term relationship actually about 23 years of um coercive control and emotional financial abuse. So asking Helen what was important to her uh she said that she wanted to share the last few months of her life at home uh and be supported by her sons who all three of them had agreed to come back home to look after mom. She was actually to be honest quite a complex discharge. required extensive communications with the police, a restraining order, uh a variety of care providers, GPS, district nurses, hospice at home teams and specialist palative care team and myself. So to manage uh these symptoms and support we how we supported this when we got this lady home, we did what we call an emergency health care plan and this was to enable these complex symptoms to be managed well at home. There was also documents, don't resuscitate documents that had to be put in place, fasttrack care, um, which funded the care four times a day and we also got support from the local hospice to allow the the lads her son's time off. I mean, thankfully Helen died peacefully at home, but it required it was a wonderful example of how it's not what you expect and you'll need an awful lot of input from a lot of people. On the other hand, we have I have a lady just last week, Jane, who's 47. uh she had separated from her husband and moved back home about six years ago with her son to live with her parents because uh her dad needed support with some dementia that he was struggling with. Um they live in a really small rurally isolated community, very limited services. But unfortunately earlier this year she developed a really aggressive bowel cancer and after numerous admissions to hospital and surgical interventions, unfortunately the decision last week was for best supportive care. She came in with a bowel obstruction uh which is tricky to manage and her condition was rapidly deteriorating and Jane had been a very feisty lady who's very clear about her wishes and she'd always wanted to be looked after at home. However, managing her overwhelming distress and taking the time to have some conversations to unpick this, what was important to this lady was that her she it became apparent she hadn't discussed her prognosis or the extent of her disease with her parents or her son. So, they were they were unaware that her life was going to be ending in short days till short weeks. So, when picking what she wanted, what thing that was most important to her was that a 10-year-old son is supported. And so looking at her very rural home and the lack of services at nighttime and how to have good symptom management, we ended up negotiating for her to go to a hospice which because we're in the Lake Districts about 90 minutes away and there we were able to do some fantastic legacy planning with her son. He was going to be well supported in a very short space of time. It allowed her mom to just be a mom again rather than the carer not just for a husband with dementia but for her her daughter. So again, not the result I was expecting, but sometimes you have to ask a question. It's amazing. You have to respond to what comes back. Okay, thank you so much and impeccable timing with 20 seconds to spare. So Grace, can I hand over to yourself there? &gt;&gt; Absolutely. And it's uh it's it's where do you start sometimes when you're thinking about um about these things. Um we've had a lot of discussion um when we've been thinking about um sort of giving choice at end of life. Um and I guess one of the big things that came up for me is actually recognizing that someone is at the end of life and that is is one of the one of the challenges we face. And I think an example would be it's not unusual for us as a hospital team to be referred patient um sort of that day and we will go and review review the patient and actually by the time we've got to the patient we've um you know they've been asked for an urgent discharge home and by the time we've got to see the patient which is within that day the patient has died and it's not unusual that that patient has been in hospital potentially for several weeks. And the point that we're recognizing that patients, you know, want to have some choice and want to think about going home at end of life potentially if that's if that's their wish, we've almost missed that window because it's being identified too late. So, so one of the things that that we do see is that recognition of dying and maybe if we recognized and and started these conversations earlier and finding out what patients want, we wouldn't necessarily be sort of having these these panics um and trying to organize um discharges. It's not always the case because sometimes things change quickly and we do have to think about urgent discharges. Um a a an another example would be even if we've thought about these things sometimes things do change and we've had a patient recently in um EA which is our emergency ward um on the ward who had been in for three days so not a long period of time and had known lung cancer and had been deteriorating during that stay but they'd been trying treatment for them. So, so it was appropriate they had been in that time, but actually we got to the point where it had become apparent that the treatment wasn't wasn't being effective and we were looking at a patient who was end of life. We had a very small window at that point to get this patient home and so one of our jobs is to go in and have a think about what's needed for this patient. you know, if if they're they were very keen to get home at end of life and we think about things like do they need a hospital bed? Do they need carers to come in to support that care? And the reality was the things that were identified that that patient needed, we could not get in place because of there wasn't the capacity for the response to be that quickly and the patient ended up dying in the hospital. Um and that was a patient who was keen to die to die at home and we were not achieving preferred place of care and it's not unusual um that patients are sat on wards for for long periods of time awaiting nursing home beds and so I think I think there's two themes that really have come out this the the sort of the theme of we need to recognize earlier and maybe start having conversations earlier you know that what what would wishes be um if when things change um and I think a lot of work is being done with that um about thinking about how can we how can we identify these patients but also thinking about actually do we have the resources to then be able to respond to what people's wishes are and how how does that that mismatch how does that Okay. the screen share live. Thank you. Sorry about that everyone. We lost we lost a few of the just like the probably the last like 10 to 20 seconds of that. I'm so sorry Grace, but I think we're back again, right? I will disappear again now. &gt;&gt; No, you're fine. So, can I just double check? We just lost the last sort of 15 20 seconds. Yeah. So, Grace, I don't know if you want to just conclude again sort of recap of your last sort of 30 seconds or so. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So, so the gentleman that I was talking about who we wanted we wanted to get home and who we needed to get IV antibiotics into. So there was a real conflict of does he stay in hospital or does he go home? But without the IV antibiotics, we actually between a lot of work with a lot of different people um he managed to go home with an indwelling uh line a pick line in place and some amazing district nurses who are administering administering those antibiotics. And so I think there are times when when mountains are moved to get people where they want to be. Brilliant. Thank you very much and thanks again to our colleagues for sorting out the technical gremlins. Um Yan, can I ask you to um to have your five minutes? &gt;&gt; Sure. Thanks, Ian. Um yeah, so um going back to the uh subtitle of this panel, the giving choice at the end of life. Um I was thinking about the context that this choice happens in. Um so people making decisions at the end of life based on what services is available to them um based on where they live and how far these services are as we've heard and so on um and whether they've got access to care unpaid care um so um I've been doing research using um routinely collected data on this wider context on a nationwide level in Scotland and specifically how that context has changed since the covid pandemic and uh specifically I've been looking at um the increased number of people who died at home um during the pandemic and the increase in home death basically since the pandemic as well. Um and also how the demographic profile um of people who died at home um has changed and how people engaged with health services in their final 12 months of life. Um just a sort of very high level overview of this. Um the number of home deaths in Scotland increased by about 35% um during the first year of the pandemic. Um which you as you can imagine is a massive increase of um the number of people engaging with um uh community based services. Um and since the pandemic um approximately a third of all people who die in Scotland die at home and that's up from about 25% before the pandemic. Um so as I mentioned um my research uses um uh data held by um public bodies. So these are routinely collected data by the NHS and by national records of Scotland who collect um death registrations. And I've been able to link um death registrations between 2015 and 2021. So the first year of the pandemic and uh link them to people's um health service use in their final 12 months of life. This includes um admissions to hospital uh prescribing data and unscheduled care data. Unfortunately, um paleative care specifically isn't available on a nationwide level. Um there are various um regional um uh data sets from specialist services. Um but for this sort of nationwide work um I've had to make a couple of proxy measures such as inferring whether people um had paleative care needs um based on their cause of death and their um hospitalizations in the final year of life. Um and also things like um looking at prescriptions for medicines that are used in anticipatory or just in case um use cases. Um so um what the research has showed so far is that we're really seeing an increased demand for community services as a result of these um increased home deaths and also services very early in the pandemic also restructured to better provide uh community care and care at home and the demographic profile of um people who died at home has shifted. Um so people dying at home are now older than they were before the pandemic. They're more likely to be male and married. Um and they also have a higher level of multimorbidity and the wider range of medicines that they were prescribed. Um so what we're seeing is a kind of shift from uh people dying in hospital to uh dying in the community both in terms of the relative proportions of where people die but also in the kind of um complexity of care needs. So especially with multimorbidity and this um high range of medicines now also being more likely at home. Um we've also found that um hospital admissions for people who were dying at home were shorter and people were discharged home earlier. Uh so on the whole people were spending more time at home in their final 12 months and therefore more likely to then engage with um homebased services. Um so kind of as a conclusion to this thinking about the context um in which people make choices in the end of life in Scotland this context has changed quite a lot um with the pandemic. um we know from um sort of these survey studies that people prefer to receive care or to die at home. So in some ways this has accelerated sort of enabling this kind of choice although during the pandemic how this happened um of course is debatable but what we now see is that more people are dying at home and um that a lot of services have kind of shifted towards supporting people who are dying at home as well. Thank you very much Yan and indeed thank you very much to um all of our panelists. So to open up to discussion, we've heard about the challenges of enabling um choice in often very um challenging difficult situations. And we've also heard that um that has only accelerated across the population certainly in Scotland and likely more widely as well. Um so yeah I wonder to what extent it's realistic to um talk about choice especially given bonding constraints. Um perhaps Grace can I come to you first? Do you want to comment on that? I think I think one of the one of the challenges with patient choice is um actually having those conversations and I I think patients need to be able to explore their choices. Um and we don't always provide provide that situation until sometimes it's it's too far down the line that that they're they're not in a position to really explore what their choices are. So an example would be a research project that we did with the home ventilation team um for our region and we interviewed all the clinicians from the team but also patients involved in that team and a lot of it was about advanced care planning because if we don't do the advanced care planning we don't know what their choices are to then be able to to try and sort of do some planning um in place. And interestingly, the biggest thing that came out from both sides, patients were were tentative to bring it up because if it hadn't been sort of spoken to them about that they were maybe in their last year of life and maybe we need to think about that, they didn't want to to suggest that. Um, but clinicians quite often didn't feel that they had the experience to start having these conversations with patients. So I think that is one of the things that I think is a challenge. But alongside that, I think we're also seeing a lack of continuity of care that maybe 10, 20 years ago, we had more continuity with general practitioners and sort of and from that study and observations I think particularly in the community there isn't the same opportunities in that sense to sort of really have those discussions to then go right what what are your what are your wishes and how can we how can how much choice can we provide in Yeah, really interesting. Fiona, do you want to um comment on that? &gt;&gt; I think it's really I think on a really basic level um some of the problems we have is it's equipment. You know, we you know, people like, you know, if we're going to have nursing interventions at home, the carers, we need what's called profiling beds. So, they'll go up and down so nurses and carers aren't hurt in the backs. Uh and there's a limit time when there are. And I've got a couple of p people at the minute who are bed blocking you could call because the pro that the equipment's not ready for them. They're not able to get them. And also uh right at the minute in one of our cities Carlile I can't get a fast track discharge to a nursing home because there's no beds and you know we can struggle with getting care at home. So we've got quite a significant um blockage because of equipment and care really. Never mind the really complicated bits of care we do. This is just the basics. So, &gt;&gt; so Yan, we've we've heard the the challenges for from point of view of clinicians. Um, given this increase in deaths that we've seen in Scotland, like I say, that's quite likely been reflected across the UK. um do we have any sense as to the extent to which people's wishes are being met or is this something that uh you're going to be able to look at with uh with the the data? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So um like like I said we know from uh survey research that people's preferences are generally to die at home but of course this differs with um everybody's situation and can also change over time as people's um uh condition changes at the end of life. Um unfortunately data on um advanced care planning or patients preferences aren't collected in a way that enables research on a nationwide level. Although I think you you can find um sort of local systems that uh um that uh record these things. So um I think the direction of research there is probably going to be sort of investigating these on a more regional level. Um and then also trying to um think about whether we can design a kind of um minimum um uh data set for collection for paleative care services and that would include things like recording um patient preferences as well. Um, so as far as I'm aware, there isn't currently a nationwide um palative care uh data collection and uh not there also isn't a sort of minimum data set for this sort of thing in Scotland. It's &gt;&gt; really interesting. There's a few things you said there which I'd like to come to Fiona and Grayson, but before I do that and you know given what we sort of moved into thinking about research um perhaps um Fiona if I can come to um yourself. I mean what from a you know what are the things that keep you awake at night? What are the questions that you would like to see answered um um from you know um that you know we just at the moment don't have evidence to uh to really make decisions. I think interestingly I think the minimum data set would be a genius idea but um different GPS different services well different healthcare use different platforms and then you know we all know how difficult it is to get for those to speak together so I think the minimum data set would be a genius idea I think what what keeps me awake about we were talking this is a stack of things um the the main one I this may be a local problem because we've had were quite rural Carile or White Haven and so we're in Cumbria. We were struggling with staff and we got a lot of uh staff brought in from overseas which is great because we've got more staff. Now the interesting problem we've ended up with is that different communities and different ethnicities have a different approach to palative care or it's not part of their vocabulary. So we've ended up with a lot of health care professions who who literally can't talk about death and dying and it's part of their culture. you treat somebody till the point where they are dying, you don't stop or else you're going to be in trouble. So, we've had to do an awful lot of education, haven't we? You've done an awful lot of training um with consultants, with staff, with new nurses to educate them really about what palative care is. So I'd had two years out in research and I came back and I thought we've gone backwards what's happened but it's great we've got more staff but we've had just and it's those really basic conversation how you even have that discussion with a patient like we've done this we've done that unfortunately things aren't working you know we need to change our focus of care and can I suggest and what's important to you they were unable to have the conversation so that's that's the main one but we've done something about it done a lot of education Grace, do you want to add to that? What are the things that keep you awake at night, Grace? &gt;&gt; Oh, I think I I think there's lots of things. Um I think inequity sometimes um is one of the things certainly that that we see and I I know they talk and I don't like the term a postcode lottery but that there ultimately is a is an element of you know what's what's available and what's you know is is that going to allow your choices to happen and we do have situations where patients you know in one place would be able to stay at home whereas actually we cannot meet their needs in another place and and staying at home isn't an option and and all of that feeds into the patient choices because we so much I mean one of my first questions when speaking to a patient is you know what's your priority in all of this what what's important to you what sort of but with that it's then trying to trying to sort of find out about that but then how do you allow them to have that choice if we you know if we are not able to meet those needs then. So it's so it becomes quite hard when you're having those conversations but then also thinking right how how can we meet this need because this is going to be a challenge. &gt;&gt; Really interesting. Um so Yan if I can come to you next and um yeah and Fiona teed this up on purposely and so um Fiona suggested that the minimum data set is a genius idea that is something you're developing. So yeah, how do you think that that will help um um both in terms of patients and in terms of clinicians um such as Grace and P? What are the kinds of things that you have in mind with this minimum data set? &gt;&gt; Yeah. So um the the idea with the minimum data set is that it would allow sort of um collection and comparison of data from various service services on a nationwide level. um which would allow us to see um like we were saying because because these choices um people make at the end of life they they really depend on the context. So whether people live a rurally or in an urban area um that sort of thing. Um so it would allow us to look at um how service provision differs by but across the country whether it's different between um different places. Um one one thing that I was thinking about in this in the previous question about this um what keeps people awake at night is that um we also don't collect data on the people's um subjective experiences of care and whether they received good quality care and whether we're enabling um good quality death at the end of the day. Um, so it would be great if we were able to collect data on this as well. But I'm also very aware that sort of part of the reason to design a minimum data set for collection is also because the collection of data is quite ownorous and um all of these services are already sort of um doing their best. So asking people to collect more data is is difficult. Um but yeah, I think for for research on a kind of population level having a standardized um set of data that all of these services will be collecting would be really valuable. That's really interesting. Um, and given the work that you've done and the increase that um, you saw, I mean, that must have been incredibly and be incredibly challenging coping with. I mean, Fiona Grace, I mean, um, does that does it come as surprise to you that that there was such a large increase in home deaths and that it continues through to the current day? Um I I hope and and and it's that it's that difficulty of sort of knowing I hope this is a positive because sort of data generally suggests that people predominantly prefer to be at home and sometimes that's not possible. Um but actually if we're seeing that that that fills me with hope that maybe this is something that we can do and I guess it's then extrapolating it and going how is this been possible and sort of what what can we learn from that and so I I'm really encouraged by that data and it's and it's and it's trying to work out why there's been that shift and how we can how we can keep those options there for people. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I read you I read your your paper and I just thought whoa you know we've been we've been after this for years. I've been doing this job for over 25 years. I think we're actually getting there. It's nice to see we're moving in the right direction. But what we do acknowledge um and the way the jobs and the roles changed in the last 5 to 10 years. Way more complexity way more complexity of what we're having to deal with and then try and manage at home with sometimes fewer services. In some ways the the the services don't appear to have reflected the complexity of of what we're seeing. What we can manage at home given the opportunities is incredible. You know we got people on home ventilations which there's people on TPN feeds at home being fed into a there's a there's a ton of stuff that is possible if we've got the care. Again, we're very post code lottery here, so it's challenging. &gt;&gt; And I guess these challenges sort of um they're not just about um people with expertise in paliative care. My my guess is that people across specialities um paliative care is something that they are likely to engage in. people um the conditions change and um so yeah, I was very struck by what you were saying about um the educational needs and clearly that's a key part of the NHS 10-year plan. I mean um perhaps um um Grace, if I can come to yourself first, what what what do you see as being the key educational needs um across NHS England and indeed more widely across the UK? I think one of the big things the the thing that actually one of the things that keeps me awake at night is is the way we're seeing it. We know the population is rising and how are we or certainly the the more elderly the more frail people are potentially living longer people having cancer treatments you know amazingly you know people are staying alive for longer but with also all the challenges of complex disease and uh the side effects of treatment. So we we've got an increasing frail population that that we sort of need to need to meet the needs for. Um certainly our small palative you know palative care is just a tiny part of that but it's upskilling everyone to be able to deliver good quality end of life care. Um because I think I I think it needs sort of the whole workforce really to be to be competent to feel that they can have those conversations to feel that they can they can deliver the sort of you know the the general end of life care because it is a general thing that sort of everyone everyone needs to be and I think with that sort of that that education out into into the wider sort of communities and I know sort of the the huge um sort of movement with compassionate communities sort of going actually is a more as communities we need to be doing as we as we recognize that this population is getting bigger and and it needs to be sort of everyone involved in that. So where does that education stop and you know it it's a big it's a big thing if we're if we're rolling a lot of this out into the community. &gt;&gt; Yeah. And as said was crossing my mind as you were talking um there and perhaps Fiona if I can come to you on that. I mean a big part of the NHS 10-year plan is to see increasingly care provided in community settings. I mean uh how realistic is that in terms of enabling end of life care and enabling choices? I &gt;&gt; I think it's it's always going to be a challenge because it's going to be it's going to resource that one really. We've got really basic problems with getting carers. We've got a quite we've got pockets of small communities and so we've got we've got a limited ability to um get get care and get staff from that. I think it's interesting. We've had a couple of problems interesting issues recently. I think we are absolutely lacking in places where we can not people sometimes fall before between groups that they're too poorly to be at home. They're not quite not quite well enough to be at home. They're too poorly to be in hospital the other way around. And we sort of need a place where it's almost like supported living. Yeah. Don't we? Um for for young people otherwise they spend months and months and months in hospital and we haven't got anything like that here. I think you said there was something over in the northeast, didn't you? &gt;&gt; So there's and and how we look after the complexity of care in hospital whether we've got a home ventilations or we're doing peg feeding into tummies and all sorts of things. It's there's a lot and there's the services aren't around unfortunately. &gt;&gt; I see that that's thank you very much for that and indeed thank you to all our panelists. I'm just seeing Han coming um online there. Um I'm aware that we're just about to hit 20 pass. So a huge thanks to all our panelists and Han I'll hand over to you there. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much and thanks everybody for your patience like working through all this technical stuff. um really appreciate it like such wonderful insights. I love the contrast between the numbers um from Yan and then the the personal really personal stories as well from you both. Um so yes, thank you and thank you so much Ian for your awesome chairing. Um so that's the end. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; That's the end of the panel and we've got um three lightning talks and then we'll be back in the main room for the closing remarks at 4:40 p.m. So 20 minutes. So you can catch a quick lightning talk if you want to. Um but otherwise thank you again. See you later. Thank you.