Um, we move quickly on because it's fast uh fast-paced here, isn't it? Um, and I Sarah Blendell and um Andy Laval who are I'm reading off my sheet now. Um, both work for NHS England. Sarah is the desk lead for data professionalization. is and I've seen a few discussions. So I know um I'm a big supporter of it. Um and so really excited to uh introduce you and welcome you and um and I will uh there's going to be time for questions. They tell me we've got a nice 25 minutes here in this session. Um and so at the end I'll I'll be popped back in and we'll see what questions we've got and have a have a chat about it. So um thank you very much for joining us and I shall see you near the end. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thank you Karen. So said I'm Sarah Bland. I'm lead for data and analytics professionalization at NHS England. And Andy, would you like to introduce yourself? Looking very &gt;&gt; daffed. Well, I thought I'd dress up for a conference. You know, I've never even got Santa. Uh Andy Lavel, senior manager for analytical professionalization at NHS England. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. And can we have our slides, please? Fabulous. So we're here today to talk to you about the national competency framework and what's coming up in version three of the framework that we've been very busy uh with colleagues uh building over the last few months. Next slide please. So what are we going to talk about today? We're going to talk about what is the national competency framework to catch you up for anyone who who has been living under a rock for the last few years or maybe is just new to the NHS. We're going to talk about what's new in version three. We're going to give you a bit of a recap because we all like methodology about how that content's been developed. Andy's then going to talk about how people are using the framework. Uh but also obviously this is not a this is not a closed process. We have still got more time for you to uh to have your say about version three. Uh but also how you can learn more about the national competency framework and start your competency framework adoption journey. Next slide please. So just a bit of a recap for what is the national competency framework. So it is a skills and competency framework for people who work across data and analytics within health care within par uh within public health even for people that are working across sectors uh broader than that. We've got people obviously in education and a few other areas that are starting to use it. And what it allows us to do is to articulate and set out skills and competency frameworks that are needed within different roles and at different stages of your career. So it sets it out across five practitioner levels. And this is done deliberately so as to align with professional body practitioner statuses uh and also to sort of get round that pesky uh thing of uh different grades within uh different organizations you know etc. civil service to uh local authority to NHS obviously all have different grade boundaries and we want this to be able to use be used across multiple uh sectors. It sets them out then for different job families. So we look at the data family and what we mean by that is a whole range of roles and traditionally this has then covered data analyst, data engineer, data scientist the most the more established roles but then in the in the last iteration version two we also introduce data governance, data ethics analytics engineer and machine learning engineer and these basically then cover everything from band 3es up to band nines. Can I have the next slide please? So what's different about version three? Well, quite a lot. Uh so obviously what we try and do is align up with uh government digital and data uh capabilities uh within the GAD framework and one of the new things that came in GAD of this year was the introduction of a more specialist role around evaluation. Now obviously they've called it digital evaluation. We've called it evaluator brackets digital because we obviously recognize that within the NHS we have much broader evaluation specialist than just digital and we want to make sure that they're included within this. So in line with that we've obviously introduced this whole new role uh that covers from practitioner level one that entry level position all the way up to our heads of service in our practitioner level five our leading practitioners. And there are five different areas that we've included competency statements around. So the context of why and when to evaluate, how to scope and design evaluations, specialist data collections and analysis techniques for evaluation, how to lead and manage them, and then also then how to use and disseminate evaluation findings that really then brings in all those more specialist communication skills that might be needed to communicate evaluation uh etc. Uh so that's the brand new role that's come in. Next slide please. The second thing is obviously we've been extending and revising existing sections of the competency framework. So one of which again is responding to uh the changes within the GAD framework. One of which was the introduction of data ethics in for data analysis for the very first time. So what we've done is we've created a new competency DAC7 that reflects that increasing role that data analysts have around data ethics and this includes things around the use of AI not just the you know safe use of AI outputs itself but also things like AI from an ethics and professional standards. So very much covering that whole you know you are able to actually replicate and understand the theory of this if you needed to replicate in an alternative program. It might take you long but you at least understand so you have got the underlying skills to do these sorts of things without AI which I think for people working in analysis is incredibly important that they keep that professional standards and credibility. Secondly [gasps] was the extension expansion out of the data ethsist role. When this was introduced uh it was only at that level four and level five practitioner and based on that sort of real expansion of those specialist style roles going forward probably with the introduction of probably more AI specific roles. We have now extended that down all the way down to practitioner level one. So there's more entry level skills around these area. And lastly, we've extended out the behaviors framework which is part of our ancillary framework uh to include a new competency BE7 which is around reflective practice. Next slide please. So what else has been added? Well, specialism. So for those of you who are aware of how the competency framework is structured, core competencies are around those core skills that we would be expecting the 90% to be able to do within those roles. And then there are specialist technical skills that exist that will be the flavorings the thing that might make your role unique and different within the team compared to others uh the things that make you special. Uh so what we've obviously done is in response to some feedback we have been changing uh some of the existing definitions. So based on feedback we've made changes to the advanced statistics uh specialism and the SQL specialism. What we've also done uh is again based on feedback from the work we've done we've been doing with public health was introducing three new specialisms this time. One of which is skills around responding to consultations. Another one is around design and analysis of studies and then the last one is very much around that broader broader skill set of literature searching and critical appraisal of those results and research skills etc. Some of which obviously we we've heard some fantastic presentations on earlier today. Next slide please. So how has this content been developed? Well, we've followed our standard national competency framework methodology which is very much open transparent engagement uh collaborative approaching. So firstly was doing that literature searching of existing content that already exists out there. We don't replicate wheel uh if it already exists we find it uh we bring it in and we include that along with other uh core content. So taking things like GAD framework updates but putting that alongside literature searching we had fantastic support from uh UK HSA this time in order to basically do a load of that work. Then obviously creating initial straw mans and then taking that through workshopping. So we've brand between two and five workshops for each of the different topic areas depending on the complexity that's with bringing representation from across the system to review that make iterative changes etc. We're currently then out for user testing with the wider community and Andy's going to talk a little bit more about that later. But this is then the opportunity for everybody to have their say on what those uh proposed changes are to the framework. And then lastly, we'll take those final feedback in make any final changes have change logs around what we've accepted and why. uh where things then can be incorporated into the version three that gets published on the 26th of March and where we might take things uh into uh a version for if it's more complicated uh for versions and changes. Next slide please. So we're now over to my lovely cond colleague Andy who's then going to tell you a bit more about how people are using the framework. &gt;&gt; And hopefully I'm on the screen now. Let me just check. Yeah. So uh obviously we've got the competency framework but what you want to know is actually do people use it and do people find it useful. So we're just going to take you through a quick case study from Ardan and Gem CSU. Uh so Ardan and Gem have been providing uh services to think there's over 30 organizations they've been doing. So quite a large organization obviously in the C CSUs and now all the CSUs are coming together and then they're all going to disappear but we won't talk about that just at the minute. But it's how they've been using this to sort of help them understand their workforce, what the structure is, and then how they can sort of help support them in the the changes that are going. So with the uh competence framework, there's a self assessment tool that people can download. You can go and download that yourself and just complete it for your own purposes. There are add-on bits that we've got that are then for managers to then start to pull together all those individual profiles if they want to then start to say actually what is that skill composition and what are the competencies of the team that I've got which is what they've been doing. So you can see that they started to look they could see what the sort of different roles that they had were. Um look at the stuff on the bandings, look at the practitioner levels that people were were were uh coming out at which they were finding really useful just to kind of help structure those uh discussions. But then they could also then start to drill down into that and say what are those areas where our staff feel really competent at? What are those real strengths that we've got? What the practitioner levels that we've got? That then helps them understand when you're being asked to um you know by provide us whatever to to help support on some of these requests where those skills might lie, who those people are that you can start to pick up and and bring them in and bring their skill sets so that you can use it efficiently. And they were also able to look and say actually where have we got areas that we might need to bolster up? What are some of those things that we think we need to develop our skills into and and what are the ones that staff are wanting to bring their skills into? Now, this can help change the way that you're starting to look at the training. So, if you know that you've then got a number of people within the organization who are wanting to focus on a specific area, you then may be able to get some bespoke training in and get some uh more effective and more um collaborative way across the the organization of of doing that training. So it certainly helps you identify what those gaps are that you want to train on and then how you might best be able to go forwards on plugging those gaps. So how they've started to find that that's impacted is that um they they've as I say it's done that ongoing learning development. They're looking at Python, PowerBI, data visualization that those sorts of bits that they want to do. um getting people onto the level four data analyst apprenticeship to to be able to help build those skills and and looking at the way that that's then able to say because we did that analysis because we worked out what those gaps were, we're able to identify the right training for people and then we're able to put them on a career pathway to develop them and to help them achieve that next step up. And that's really what we all want within the analytics world is to know how do I how do I develop my skills so I'm delivering the maximum benefits that I can with the skill set I've got at the minute and how do I make that transition to the next level that I want to do and what are the opportunities that I've got within the um the analytical world to do. If you want to know more about that um art and gem uh case study it's on the analyst X page national competence framework. If you're not on analyst X please get on analyst X. It's one of the biggest analytical communities that we have out there for people across health, social care, local authorities, um, and and beyond. We've got police and we've got education. I think Sarah was kind of alluding to before how how wide both the framework and analyst X go. But just some of some of the things that um, you know, the CSU had done, they've now got it so that it's embedded. It helps to structure some of those PDP conversations that they have. And particularly at the minute where we're in such a state of flux and we're all wondering what the next step's going to be. It just helps you understand what are your strengths, what are your core skills, what are the things that you're good at, what are the things that you might want to be looking to develop some training in and to get some more experience of to help you make that next step or to help you take advantage of that next career move that you want to have. So it's there and and you can use it at the individual level, the team level or the organizational level. It works on different ways that you can do it. But particularly if you're on the call today and you're thinking, well, how can I use this? Just go download the self assessment tool. You can use it and you can recognize how brilliant you are and all the skills that you have and that you're able to take forward. So where we're talking about getting involved, Sarah said open, transparent, collaborative. I put on my LinkedIn post today. This is a framework for the analytical community developed by the analytical community. This is not Sarah and I that have done it. We rely on the community taking part and inputting and helping to steer this because it's in all our benefits to make sure that we're talking so much about how much analytics can now start to have this impactful way that it's going to be working on the future of the NHS and we need to make sure we're as skilled as fit and match ready as possible to be able to go and deliver on this agenda that we've got and to really make those impacts that we know and will really hungry to do. So helping shape this framework is really important. So version 3 is now for testing. It went out on the 17th of November and it will be open until the 16th of January. So over that Christmas period be to sit down on Boxing Day and have a look through the competency framework. There's nothing better uh than doing that on a a Christmas period. But you can go and look, you can have a look at the changes that we're making. You can give us some feedback. Even things that have already been there, you can give us some feedback if the wording's not quite clear. If you think we've missed something, if you think maybe there's a different way of expressing what we've done, this is your opportunity to look and to feed in and be part of developing this framework as we go forwards. So, there's no point in June saying, "Oh, they should have that way. You know, they missed that. They didn't cover that." Now's the time to get involved. We we want your input because actually it's not it's not just for us to do this, but it's for the whole community. So, if you've got stuff that you think needs to be in there or needs to be changed because it's going to make it better for everyone, please, please, please do that. There's a a QR code there that you can scan. I'll leave it just up there for another second, but I think the details are going to be sent out later as well. And as I said, if you if you want to start your adoption journey, if you want to join Nico there with the little map to plot out your career, we hold uh fortnightly uh new adopter calls. So we also do training as well. So every Thursday, well probably in about 10 minutes time, but don't go stay with us for an hour. But between 12 and 1, there will be something going on for the competency framework. It's either training on how to use the tool. It's about the new supporters call where you can come along and find out any questions that you've got, anything that you can ask. And then partway through that new adopters call, we then get joined by the masses. We get joined by those other people that have been using it, the wonderful people from Arden and Gem, the wonderful people from Miz and Lang CSU, the wonderful people from Imperial that have all been using this and they'll come along and you can ask them questions or they can share things that they've been doing with this as well. So, we've got these things. Then, we've also got all the stuff that's on the Analyst X events calendar so that we can start to make that make you aware of what's coming up, what there is that you can tap into. And as I say, you can download this tool now. You can go on to Analyst X and you can populate even if you just do it for yourself, it's well worth doing because this gives you an opportunity to benchmark where you are against a national peer-reviewed standard that has has been set for these sorts of things. Thank you very much for listening. I can see Karen's just appeared now. My timer was just about to uh to go off then, so I'll turn that off. But that's our contact details if you want to get in touch. Um, and thank you very much for listening. I hope you found it interesting. Um, I think everybody did. So, well done Andy and uh and Sarah. Thank you massively for that. So, we've got oh, we've got a good six minutes for questions. So, that's really lovely, isn't it? To get that that time. Um, so somebody called patients has asked if you could drop the uh drop the link please because the QR QR code appears not to be working for her. So uh if you could do that um the QR code says it's been deactivated. &gt;&gt; Um nothing to do with the CSU's going um yet. Um anyway was that was a joke based on your joke at the beginning. Um and um and okay, so um Janet Parr has asked uh Steve Wyatt's session this morning was really interesting and and I [clears throat] was wondering how the recommended separation between BI and analysis relates to the competency framework or if it's something maybe you you've not thought about or considered before. &gt;&gt; We have. So the irony is is the GAD framework does have those separated and when we did the initial work three years ago we merged them rather than them having them separated because the reality for the NHS is that the separation isn't there and our framework is about something that people can use now. Uh so we obviously looked at what the core underlying skills were for data analysts and BI performance and at the core level for a lot of the junior level it's the same high numerousy good digital data skills etc the ability to do descriptive and transformeration all these sorts of things the core skills about data transformation are ultimately the same it becomes when you're doing the more specialist areas is where things differentiate so what we chose to do was we'll keep things in core the same but we then created specialisms and the specialisms are there to reflect the different nuances of different types of analysts. So you know people would turn around and say oh we economists should have its own core definition or oh people should have and it's like well yeah in an ideal world but what we're trying to do is produce something that this is the core that everyone should have and then these are the things that make specific types of people different and it might be that as if the NHS and it's a big if because slow change is slow goes down that route of [sighs and gasps] expecting people to have different job descriptions for those roles that that might be something the competency framework then adapts to reflect but we don't have any standardization in current job descriptions and we're trying to introduce that. That's the piece of work that we've got going on with mids and lengths at the moment and our digital professions is to produce standard agenda for change approved panel approved job descriptions based on the competency framework. Uh they aren't even in place. uh and we know the NHSBSA has done a ton of work looking at you know K means clustering of skills definitions and the analyst one is all over the all over the piece compared to things like data engineer that's much more clustered. Um so these types of things it's it's still baby steps for us. We want to bring that in and then we'll put things in specialisms as they come up and if there is significant transformation where they are really thought of as different roles but they're not currently then we would adapt the framework to reflect that. &gt;&gt; So at the moment so so would it be fair to say you've gone with the majority what people need now &gt;&gt; we've gone with the 90%. Yeah &gt;&gt; exactly and if you use the core um then the core is pro probably works for all &gt;&gt; um and then the specialisms then then layer them on on top. So if you are going down the route, if you do have um if you are working somewhere that is unusual in the fact that they have split the two, they've had that foresight to do that or are about to or or go to, then they can use the framework in that way. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. We've always said that it is very much uh the the build a bear, the pick a mix, the Lego build, however you want to do it. It's there to provide consistent language, but how you use choose to pull from it is how you would build that relevant to the the job that you're actually trying to fill, the role that you're trying to fill. Great, great clarification there. Thank you very much. And then the final question in our last couple of minutes is from Phil Wormsley and he's um I'm he's asked I'm interested what the flaws are in the government GAD framework in your opinion that motivate the need for a separate NCF for health. So firstly obviously GAD is built for central government. So it is built around the roles and the roles as they see them. So we do influence. So I sit on the Gad board for data analysts now and have for the last year to to sort of start bringing more changes in but it doesn't reflect the range that these roles do within the NHS uh and and the additional skills and requirements that we have uh etc. And because they have that requirement that whatever goes in has to be able to work across multiple multiple government departments. Uh and so it tends to be quite high level uh not from a perspective of something that we can then really link through for us into training and targeted. So for us it was about taking that as the bare bones and putting more flesh on it to make it more adaptable for the NHS. So for example, you know, for them they've put evaluator in, but it's digital evaluator. So they're only evaluating digital products. We know in the NHS evaluation is a specialist skill area. And we're doing more than just digital evaluation. So it enables us in the NCF to take what they've done, it's a good idea, but adapt it and put that in. So Andy's been the colleague, he's been doing the evaluator build. So you know 90% of that evaluator it doesn't matter what you're evaluating the skills are the same but then the digital part is is that a separate competency that that might then focus on specifics of evaluating digital uh etc. Whereas so for us if we were just to put that digital evaluate in or just use that then it excludes all these other people that are doing you know service evaluation or you know these types of things. So, &gt;&gt; so you I I can see that you're um having to uh what's the word? Uh make um judgments based on the time, the capacity and um uh and what you're able to do. Um and so and yeah, to manage that which &gt;&gt; and what and what the user base is asking for. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So it tends to be much more this is good, but this isn't helpful for us. You know, we start with the GDA framework. We would start with that as part of our consultation exercise and then other people make the recommendations for the changes based on what their current requirements are. So &gt;&gt; yeah, so thank you. Thank you both very much. Um literally spot on. Uh time is time is done now. So again um Phil, anybody that has further questions for Sarah and Andrew Andy go and find them in the in the chat in the audience of the way this platform works. My apologies. Those are my um technical hands. Um, and I'm going to say thank you very much. And um, and could we have another our last one before lunch?