All right. Hello everyone. Um, welcome back to the improving flow vertical of this uh, this program. So, my name is Phil Wsy. I'm head of data science at Palm Health and Social Care. Delighted to be here chairing the session on improving flow and um, thanks again to the strategy unit um, for everything they've done and all the other people who've been involved with organizing this. It's uh, going very well I think so far. Um, let's bring in our speakers. We've got uh we've got a talk from some of our my good friends and colleagues at NHS England. So we welcome Liliana, Scarlet and Ilas who are going to talk to us about site level COVID 19 vaccine demand forecasting efficiency across NHS vaccination sites. Take it away everyone. &gt;&gt; Okay, amazing. Thank you Phil for the introduction and I'm really happy to present you this project and how at NHS England uh we use data science and machine learning to improve um the distribution of COVID vaccine. So before uh diving into the juice and how um and how we use uh machine learning and data science I just would like to to explain briefly how the supply chain of covid vaccine works uh because it's quite different from other vaccines. So uh basically the state of England through OXA buys the vaccine and NHS England is responsible for the the deployment meaning that NHS England is responsible to ensure that across a thousand of site we have the right vaccine at the right time at the right quantity and and and and it's it's it's quite a complex it's a it's a quite a complex work due to the number of sites and the product characteristic uh because for example COVID vaccine has a pretty short share of life. So, initially at the beginning of the COVID vaccine pandemic, we had a very restricted number of sites around 1,000 sites and each order was raised uh manually. Now, we have increased the number of sites to 7,000 and therefore we needed to find a way to automate the ordering process and it's why TDM has been has been developed. So what is TDM? So TDM stand for target deployment model and this it's basically a supply chain model which automatically generate an order of vaccines on behalf of the sites meaning they don't have to manually &gt;&gt; sorry to interrupt you but I don't think the slides are moving. &gt;&gt; Uh indeed the site the slide are not moving. Okay. Interesting. Uh [snorts] they're definitely moving on my screen. Is it better now? &gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah, that's brilliant. Yeah, &gt;&gt; that's perfect. &gt;&gt; Okay. All right. I'm okay. I'm really sorry about this. Um and so um so very briefly around the COVID vaccine um like AXA BISO vaccine and NHS England is responsible for the the deployment and because we have increased significantly the number of sites uh from 1,000 to 7,000 today NHS England uh needed to find a way to automate the ordering process and it's why the target delement model has been has been developed uh which is TDM And basically what it does it generate automatically the order on a BF of the site. How it does it is basically it use two inputs. Once we have the inven uh on one hand we have the inventory position. On the other hand we have the forecast that we have generated. Using both of those inputs, we can calculate a coverage days which mean basically how many days uh of inventory the site has and depending of the threshold an order will be automatically generated for the site. the benefits. It means that it has dramatically reduced the ordering cycle because the order doesn't need to be manually created or approved which allows basically the the the the the network to increase from 1,5,000 site to 7,000. Today, [gasps] as I said, we have two hands. One is the inventory, one is the forecast. At some point last year, we thought that we've reached the ceiling of our ability to improve this forecast and therefore we have reached uh the we've reached to the data science team to see how we can improve the forecast and uh and improve uh this model. And hello, I'm Liliana from the data science and apply AI team at NHS England where as you can see here on this slide, we cover a broad portfolio of data science work which of course includes the forecasting which brings us to today's presentation. If we can go to the next slide, please. So the the question we needed to answer for Elas's team seems straightforward enough. What does vaccine demand look like at each site delivering a COVID vaccine over the next 14 days? What makes this forecast pecular is that we're doing it for more than the 6,000 sites and its timeline isn't precisely a regular one or consistent one. We'll see on the next slide. Um, thank you. that in a year there are two vaccination campaigns with a break in between. We open on a high level of demand going down quickly to a minimum level and naturally we can observe some seasonality. However, these behavior isn't always mirror at the individual um sites. [laughter] There are massive variations. While some deliver less than a handful vaccinations per day, others are in the hundreds. Some have high levels of work in while others are booking advance only. So how do we do it? Um to build a forecast, we're using past number of vaccinations and how many people have booked and the implied walking rate. the capacity each site has. We call it the slot capacity. We have the bookings to date for each of the next 14 days, but obviously that can change as as we get closer. And we also have some temporal factors like day of the week and any bank holidays, days until the campaign ends. We encode it all, plug it into the model. After testing several algorithms, we chose uh light DBM. It's a gradient boosting decision tree because it provided the best performance and was also very quick to train. It's not a native time series model. So we had to translate the time into features. So it doesn't see dates, it gets lags and rolling windows. So we train a as a global model. So that's one across all the different sites but it's capable to learn the the patterns from the data rich sites and it transfer even to new sites for which we don't have history just by the characteristics. So to handle the complexity on a 4 day forecasting horizon and then therefore 14 distinct models we use darts. It's a library for time series that automates the feature derivation and the and the grangling. Um if we go to the next one please. We um validated the model on a spring campaign, the 2021 campaign and most importantly would compare our modeling with the TDM the current deterministic approach that IAS mentioned used to place orders that which appear on the plot as the blue line. The black line over there shows the improved accuracy of about 20% that LGBM brought. If with this approach we built a pipeline to do daily retraining and do the forecast ready for the next campaign, the autumn winter 2025 which started on the 1 of September and Scarlet will tell you what happened then. Brilliant. Thank you. Okay. So what we did after we got these results is we did a live model deployment. So we still had the deterministic part of TDM running as well as the light GBM forecast and kind of to take the best from both we decided to sort of take the best value from both while also monitoring both at the same time. Next slide what we actually ended up finding. So just going to very simply explain bias which is the metric you're seeing here. When bias is above zero on average we're over forecasting for that particular date. And uh when it's below uh zero that means we're under forecasting. So as you can see for the spring campaign uh for our model when we were looking at it so this is a black line we saw that it was tending towards the zero but unfortunately what we did see for the autumn winter campaign for this current deployment we actually saw it was over overcasting and go on to the next slide. So there's a couple of things that we wanted to explore to try and explain this. Uh something that uh we think did contribute to this is actually the allegibility criteria for getting a covid vaccination had changed. it went from going uh to over 65 to over 75. And what ended up happening is we had an extremely higher cancellation rate specifically at the beginning um more so than previous campaigns and booking signal was actually one of our most important features. So we think this contributed to it. And another thing as well is because of the eligibility train we had a smaller allegible population and we had more active sites which meant that vaccination events across this winter period was also a lot smaller than it has been on previous years as well. Next slide. So um other things that we decided to look at was some general improvements to the model. So I had noticed that actually we have a lot of zero vaccine events. So for example, if you think of it per site, there might be closed. So therefore there's going to be no vaccination vents on that day. Um in the literature it's shown that actually a regressor can sometimes struggle with this because it will still predict small numbers even though there actually should be no activity on this date. So it actually suggested doing a classification and regression kind of model setup and then combine it. So we decided to investigate this. And then the other thing was actually looking at an objective. So um when you're training a light GBM model, you're trying to minimize loss. And the default for this is something called mean squared error. So you're squaring the error. Unfortunately, this is actually quite susceptible to outliers. So we decided to uh have a look at mean absolute error to see how this could improve the forecast. Next slide. Uh what we found was um actually the combination of the classification lasso regularization actually significantly improved the results from our old model but also the TDM model um by itself as well. I'm just going to hand over to Ilas to just summarize everything. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much uh Scarlet. And um and so to conclude the business value of this project was uh was clear in particular after uh the change of objective to lesser regression and we see and we saw a 20% improvement of the forecast accuracy and it's why we decided to push uh this model into production for the current campaign which has contributed to reduce waste and save admin time. Um, one of the lessons learned, it might be obvious, but always monitor model and consider drill deployment in particular if the environment where the model is about to be deployed is changing or has changed compared to the previous campaign in that case as me as Colin mentioned about the change of uh eligibility and the increase of the number of sites. uh but thanks to this success we are looking to extend the deployment of this model to to GPS for the next campaign uh in spring summer because currently it's mainly used with uh with pharmacy and in general I think there will be and there is there are many opportunities to use uh data science into uh our operations thank you very much all right thanks everyone that's Uh that was super interesting. So let's have a quick look over at Q&amp;A. So we've got people got a moment just to get a couple more questions in. But I'm interested in because you basically you explained how we have some extrinsic thing which is you know the change in the eligibility criteria has thrown the model off. Uh this is a very general problem. Maybe you can talk a little bit about how how we should be handling that kind of issue when we're when we're dealing with with our models. Sorry, there's three of you. [laughter] Scarlet, you you can take that one first and then maybe hand off. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think well there's there's a couple of things there, isn't there? Because I think one thing that we now want to be looking at is actually monitoring data throughout the whole life cycle and that's more just to flag where those kind of situations are happening. And obviously that's easier said than done when you've had the experience and you know that that's going to exist like it's kind of hard to see the unforeseen. Um the other thing I've thought about as well is possibly adding those data quality metrics into the model itself and seeing if that can improve it. And I guess we kind of have the example now of this data to test that. But that's something that we haven't done just yet. Like to clarify all of this is very much happened. I mean some of this is like been the last week or two. So it's very very up to date and very new. Um so um but yeah there's two things there. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. No, but interesting point about in theory you can go and model your data pipelines for anomalies and then when you see certain changes or whatever or something outside of an SPC band or whatever it is um that might might at least get get you there. Um I was going to um ask as well your point about reduced waste. Is there any record of waste? Because something that's always in my mind as sort of someone a bit more in the man management of all this is how do we demonstrate actually the pounds and pence impact when we put a model like this? you know, linking back to the keynotes earlier which were saying, you know, we got to get off the fence and show that we're where we're making, you know, really valuable differences. So, have you got any idea in terms of that sort of really quantitative evaluation of waste reduction here? &gt;&gt; So, the waste uh thank you very much for this question, Phil. So, the waste come from different uh uh sources, right? We have the pack size itself uh because uh basically unlike uh flu, flu vaccine is not a single doses vaccine. So we have a pack size of 60 which is a part of our operational waste and um and so in general it's very it's it's kind of difficult to measure but definitely the improvement of forecast accuracy helps contribute to prediction of which but it's difficult to measure and to give you one number and to link directly like the forecast the improvement of the forecast to the to the with the wastage. &gt;&gt; Thanks very much. So we are out of time. Um, I know that you can Sarah's got a question about supply chain cases. I'll leave everyone to to mle over in the in the Q&amp;A end there. Uh thanks very much to our speakers and I believe we have Rania waiting to come on