Here we are Stephen. Hello. &gt;&gt; Hello there. How you doing? &gt;&gt; Excellent. We can hear you and we can see your slides. So Steven joins us from the strategy unit talking today about direct and indirect impacts of industrial action on emergency department attendances in England 2022 to 2024. A causal mediation analysis with 20 hospitals. It's a long title but it's a good title. Go for it Stephen. &gt;&gt; Thanks Phil. Thank you very much. So, I'd like you to cast your mind back a few years. We were emerging from lockdown and life was returning to normal, but the number of patients attending emergency departments started to rise. Waiting times waiting times in ED um had lengthened and breaches of the 4-hour target had reached record levels. And then we had the cost of living crisis. Inflation was high and wages had stagnated. And at the end of 2022 and the beginning of 2023, several NHS staff groups voted to take industrial action to improve terms and conditions. So the question we're going to be exploring in this session is what happened to attendance durations in emergency departments during those strikes? Were patients treated more or less promptly in ED than when they attended? And what can we learn from this period? So industrial action lasted about 20 months in total. Between December 2022 and July 2024, there were 27 strikes in the NHS covering 78 days. In the early months, industrial action was taken by nurses and paramedics. But settlements for these groups were reached in about spring 2023. Junior doctors, the people we now refer to as resident doctors, began striking in June 2023 and continued until July 2024. And there were also some periods of industrial action by consultants in the middle of 2023. uh consultants and junior doctor strikes also coincided on a few occasions and several papers have explored the impact of that industrial action on the planned care system and elective waiting lists but the impact on the unplanned or the urgent care systems receive less attention. Uh there were however some anecdotal reports that flow seemed to improve during strikes and that might feel counterintuitive but on the other hand lots of plans were put in place in those times to mitigate the impact of strikes to ensure that patients didn't experience avoidable harm but this leaves us with two questions. First, are the anecdotal reports are correct? Is it the case that patient durations in ED reduced during strikes? And secondly, which of the many changes that took place on days affected by strikes influenced ED flow? So, answering these two questions might be helpful if we need to plan for industrial action in the future. And it looks like that's going to be the case now. Uh, but the strikes represent a wider opportunity to learn. Shocks bring about changes that wouldn't normally occur. They are [snorts] unplanned and inadvertent but nonetheless useful experiments. And with the right data and the right study designs, we can draw inferences about the factors that influence ED flow that we can use when trying to improve operations in normal times. Before I get into the detail of the study though, I wondered if I could ask you to have a quick guess about what you think our conclusions might be. Um, do you think ED attendance durations lengthened or shortened during strikes or were they unaffected? And if you think they changed, why do you think that was? If you're feeling brave, maybe I can ask you to drop your guesses into the chat. Uh, and then we'll maybe have something to refer to at the end of the presentation. So, I'm going to start with the first of those two questions. What was the total direct and indirect effect of strikes on patient time that patients spent in ED? So, our outcome of interest is patient durations in ED in minutes. uh and this is the difference between their arrival in ED and their departure either by discharge or admission into hospital. And we define five types of exposure. Uh attending ED during a nurse strike, a paramedic strike, resident doctor or consultant strike and finally when both resident doctors and consultants are on strike together. Now when a patient arrives at ED, there are other factors that are aside from this these exposures that are likely to influence their duration. case mix factors such as age, sex, acuity, chief complaint, temporal factors such as the time of day of presentation, whether the patient attended on a weekend or a weekday in the winter, etc. And we also need to take account of the ED that they presented at. So we need to take account of all those other factors if we're going to tease out the influence of strikes on patient durations. So we created an accelerated failure time model to estimate the impact of strikes on ED durations having control for the other coariantss. We were particularly interested in the coefficients for the exposure variable. To execute the model, we needed a data set. Our data set was built primarily from ECDS records. We drew a 50% random sample of attendances at one of 20 type one EDS between August 2022 and July 2024. The 20 providers were selected non-randomly based on the quality and completeness of their data recording. Although the sample of providers wasn't random, we did do some checks to make sure that the distribution of attendances in our data set were broadly representative of attendances at all type one units in England. We excluded patients who died before treatment um or before arriving in the department or those who left the department before treatment. And this left us with 1.7 million records each representing an attendance to which we appended information about whether the attendance took place during a strike. So these are our results from this first stage of the analysis. So having control for case mix temporal and provider pider effects patients attending during EDs patients attending an ED during a resident doctor strike saw their duration reduced by about 12.6%. durations were 5.6% shorter during consultant strikes, 4.5% shorter during paramedic strikes, and 1.6% shorter during nurse strikes. This last result was not significant at the 95% level. Both when both resident doctors and consultants were on strike together, patients adjusted durations were extended by 7.1%. These are the mean marginal effects of strikes in minutes. So during uh a junior doctor strike, patient durations were on average about 38 minutes shorter than they would otherwise have been. Another research team from the University of Lancaster has been looking at this question as well. Um the Lancaster team examined impact um at two EDS, a type one and a type three department. uh and one key distinction was that they were looking at the subset of patients that were admitted but they also found reductions in ED durations on days affected by strikes. So that's the first part of the analysis. Um the second part sought to unpack some of the drivers of these changes on ED durations. Did the changes come about as a direct result of the strikes i.e. the fact that some staff were on strike and others provided cover or were there other indirect effects of strikes at play? And for this we needed some theories uh and there were plenty of them. Everyone seemed to have a view on this topic but there wasn't much agreement on what was causing these changes. So we started by generating some theories and discussion with our project steering group. Then we conducted a descriptive analysis uh and we carried out some interviews with members of staff who worked in trust during the strikes and we used that information to refine our theories. Then we sought some data that might allow us to test those theories. In some cases we're able to find suitable data to append to our earlier data set but in other cases that wasn't possible. Um some theories related to concepts that just you know inherently difficult to measure and we're able to find data. We used it along with our existing data set to conduct a causal mediation analysis and I'm going to talk through that in a bit more detail in a minute. But our untestable theories were just considered sort of contextual factors for interpreting our findings. So the theories that people came up with um fell into three main categories. Uh first of all that durations uh in ED changed because the front door demand for ED changed. Secondly, that ED durations changed because there was more or less competition for shared resources that trusts and EDS rely on such as beds and staff. And third, the ED durations changed because operations in Egel. So another way to look at this is that changes in ED durations occurred either because of changes that took place outside of the hospital, changes that took place within the hospital but outside ED, or changes that took place within ED itself. Here's a bit more detail on the theorized mechanisms. So perhaps patients stayed away from ED during the strikes. Maybe the availability of out hospital services changed, increasing or decreasing the likelihood that a patient would attend ED. In terms of shared resources, maybe changes in bed availability influence boarding times for those people that needed to be admitted. Perhaps changes in plan care activities meant that specialists and diagnostic testing equipment were more accessible to EDS. In terms of ED operations, perhaps there were changes in test thresholds or treatment thresholds or even admission thresholds. And maybe there was a change in the regard for the 4-hour target during strikes. There were some subtler hypotheses too. These are the ones I've listed in blue that that are credible but just more likely more difficult to observe. Perhaps staff and ED were exempted from corporate or training activities. Perhaps patients recognized the unusual circumstances on those days and were more compliant and helpful, but those things are just more difficult to test. So to test our theories, we gathered some additional data and appended it to our data set. Uh to test the ED demand theories, we included data about the levels of surge provision that were present in the provider or local area when the patient attended ED. where there more or fewer ED attendances, miu attendances, community service contracts, GP appointments than we might have expected on those days. To test the shared resources hypothesis, we added data on the levels of surge provision within the hospital when the patients attendance took place, the number of elective and non-elective patients in hospital beds, the number of outpatient attendances or procedures, and the level of diagnostic imaging that took place outside ED. And finally to test the ED operations hypothesis we test we added information on the number of diagnostic tests that patients received whether the patient was admitted and finally we constructed a variable that measured whether patients were admitted or discharged just before the 4hour threshold and then we used causal mediation analysis incorporating each of these new variables to test our theories. So the objective of this analysis is to estimate what proportion of the effect of a strike uh on ED durations might be transmitted through a mediating variable. So if we can show that the strike led to changes in that mediating variable and we can show that changes in that mediating variable led to changes in the outcome then we can say that the variable mediated the relationship between exposure and ed durations and estimate what proportion of the total effect was transmitted through that variable. There's a set of statistical processes that we needed to follow for each of these three steps. These are the the first two steps uh involve building statistical models. So I won't go through the details of them here. And the third step uses those two models to draw inferences about the extent of mediation. So I know that sounds quite complicated. I'm going to kind of show you now what that means via three examples and then I'll show you the overall results. So in this first example, we're trying to estimate whether and how much the reduction in ED waiting times that occurred during the consultant strikes can be attributed to changes in emergency bed occupancy. So if bed occupants was down on days affected by the consultant strikes then maybe it was easier to admit patients from ED and reduced boarding times and this did seem to be the case. Emergency bed occupancy was systematically lower on days affected by consultant strikes and lower emergency bed occupancy led to shorter durations in ED. And we estimated that just over half the reduction in ED durations that during consultant strikes could be explained by reductions in emergency bed occupancy. So we estimated that uh during consultant strikes uh ED durations reduced by an average 17 minutes and about half of that 9 minutes can be explained by reductions in emergency bed occupancy on those days. In the next example, we wanted to test whether reductions in ED durations during resident doctor strikes could be attributed to changes in the number of outpatient appointments on those days. Maybe this freed up clinicians and other staff to improve flow through the hospital. We found that outpatient appointments were much lower on days affected by strikes, but this did not seem to influence ED durations. And because of this we concluded that the reductions in outpatient appointments did not explain the reduction in ED durations that we observed during the resident doctor strike. So one last example here we want to explore whether the reductions in ED durations during the resident doctor strike can be explained by levels of E imaging tests carried out in EDS on those days. So we're talking here about X-rays and CT scans, MRI scans, ultrasound scans. And remember, we're controlling for case mix, patient case mix in these models. So the theory here is if you had more experienced clinicians covering for junior doctors, then maybe they'd order fewer tests, speeding up patient transit through ED. We actually found no evidence that testing rates change on days affected by resident doctor strikes. Although we did find that increasing the levels of testing does tend to lead to longer stays in ED ordinarily and because of this we found because we found no evidence of a causal relationship between the exposure and the mediator again we concluded that changes in imaging testing rates can't explain the reduction in ED durations that occur occurred during the resident doctor strike. So these were three of the results I've just worked with you through now but there are 21 mediators that we tested. These are the table rows here and there were five exposures the table columns. So we had 105 results in total and I want to give you a quick overview of the total results now. So here are the total effects we observed from the first stage of the analysis. This is the reduction or increase in uh durations in ED in minutes that occurred during those strikes. um and the values I'm going to reveal in the body of the table uh will tell you that how much of the total effects can be explained by those potential mediators also in minutes. So these are the three results I've shown you already. Nine of the 17 minute reduction in consultant strikes can be attributed uh to changes in in bed occupancy, emergency bed occupancy. uh but no impact of the changes in outpatient attendance rates or casem mix adjusted imaging rates uh in ED can explain the reduction in times during the resident doctor strikes. So we found that changes in emergency bed occupancy also explain some of the changes in ED durations on paramedic strikes, resident doctor strikes and the joint resident and consultant strikes. Emergency bed occupants who was actually slightly up on the last of these. There were sizable reductions in planned care on the on many of the strikes. Lower rates of elective admissions on out lower rates of outpatient appointments, outpatient procedures, lower rates of non-emergency imaging, we could find no evidence that those reductions led to changes in ED durations. Although we found that that um uh had no evidence of imaging changes in imaging rates uh during the resident doctor strikes, we did find that blood tests increased and the number of treatments per patient also increased and perhaps as a consequence of that uh patients were less likely to be admitted and these factors did in influence ED duration somewhat and there were subtle changes in practice on in ED during other strikes when consultants were on strike. For example, blood and biochemistry tests were up and admission thresholds fell. We also found that during the resident doctor and consultant strikes, staff seem to make an extra effort to admit or discharge patients just before the 4-hour target, and this led to reductions in average ED durations. The opposite was true during paramedic strikes. And finally, we found some mostly marginal effects of changes in out of hospital provisions on patient volumes in ED uh during the strikes and their durations. So I think that that's that's the headline results. I'm just going to go through some summary conclusions now. So with the exception of the junior junior resident doctors and the joint resident doctors and consultant strikes, industrial action led to reductions in ED durations. Um hospital resources outside ED were freed up on the resident doctor and consultant strikes but less so on the other days. Increases in emergency bed availability on strike days led to lower red lower ED durations. So this is that this sort of this idea here is the kind of the support for the exit block theory of the problems we're having in EG at the time. uh most of the reduction um sorry the cancellations of planned care activities during strikes may have been necessary but didn't lead to reductions in ED this is probably the most surprising result we found people I think were expecting to find that when they cleared some of the elective work that was going on in hospitals on those days that would help flow of ED but that doesn't seem to have been the case this is an ongoing debate between BMA and and HS England at the moment most of the reductions in ED durations during resident doctor strike can't be explained via the mediators. So the reductions that we saw are kind of a direct effect of the strikes. The fact that there were fewer junior doctors in units but other staff were covering for them. Reductions in front door demand led to small reductions in ED durations. Patients were treated more intensively and emission thresholds um increased during the resident doctor strikes and efforts to manage performance against the 4-hour ED target intensified during the resident doctor and consultant strikes and that led to reductions in average ED durations. So these are a few limitations. I wasn't going to go through these in detail but happy to pick up questions about them if people have any. Uh I'm going to hand back now but just to say that the GitHub brief for the project is available if you want to have a look at it. Uh we've submitted the the work to a journal for review but if anyone wants to have a look at the manuscript uh in its current form be happy to send it to them if you email me then I'm happy to share that with you. I'll hand back to Phil. &gt;&gt; Thanks Stephen and thanks everyone very good on time so far. Uh excellent. So we've got uh yeah we've got a couple of questions over here. That's a super interesting. It's great to actually get some insight on these things where you know it's out there in the news. It's out there in the debate where we are and then to actually kind of pick the thing apart and work out what's going on. It's fantastic. I probably would have been in the camp of expecting front door ad front door uh demand to go down or something here which obviously isn't what isn't the driving force from what you've said. Um we've got a question from Jenny. So digging into that point about um noned work, would cancellations not allow for reallocation of other staff group shifts to cover the ED instead? So that's focusing on the staff aspect of that activity um being being cailed a little. &gt;&gt; So um yeah, so if we think of that as a direct effect of the strikes, you know, that that um you need to cover the missing staff that would otherwise have been in ED, then that would be um that would that would be a issue. But it doesn't seem to be that reducing elective activity on those days were was a driving force in itself. Um and that is somewhat surprising. I think a lot of people were expecting us to find find that and remember there were big reductions in elective activity and outpatient appointments in testing rates on those days. So if we if the effect was there if we could observe an effect the direct effect of reductions in elective activity uh on eurations it would have been there for us to spot. I'm pretty sure we would have spotted it if it was there but it didn't show up for any of the any of the mediators that we we looked at. Um so yeah um perhaps surprising but but &gt;&gt; reasonably confident with that finding and I think possibly the issue is that these days we have very clear separations between our emergency and elective flows and it's I don't think there's that much contamination anymore between those two patient flows. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um we've got a question from Nick here as well about you mentioned taking a 50% random cycle random sample of ED attends. Why sample at all over using the full data set? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um it's just processing power. We could have done it on the full data set, but it would have taken a long long time to run these through all the models. Remember, we were running lots of models with lots of mediators and lots of exposures. So, just to make it tractable. We did it on a 50% sample. I did test one or two on the full sample just to see if the results were substantially different. But these are such large samples, 50% random samples going to give you very, very similar results. Great. Thanks. Um, and we've got a we've got a link to the GitHub in the chat if anyone's looking for a bit more of the inside the inside scoop on how it's got done. I'm going to ask you a slightly unfair question, but we're amongst friends here. Can you um are you prepared to speculate a bit on what maybe what you think the variable might be you missed in terms of that you haven't been able to explain the whole effect you've got there? Um, would you indulge us in some speculation as to what that might might be? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean there were things we couldn't test. um um that's I suppose I remain open for um to explain that gap um in my preferred theory at the moment I'm not saying this is what happened during strikes but the the area that I would put more attention on I think if I was um if I was looking into improving ED flow would be about crowding. I think there is this relationship between crowding and ED durations which is very hard to unpick. Um but I think what happens is when when when ED departments become very busy, crowding becomes a problem in itself which slows down the transit of other patients through through the unit. Um and I suspect crowding was lower. Um because I think probably we had more proactive management of patients as soon as they arrived in ED on those days. And that was something we didn't test. We possibly could have tested it, but I was worried about this um this issue about um you know when you're doing these causal diagrams, you have to your diagrams have to be as cyclic. You can't have feedback loops between between your elements in the model and and I was just worried that introducing crowding as a variable would would would invalidate some of the the causal models that we were building. &gt;&gt; I see. is almost a second order effect you think might be kicking in or the physicist the former physicist in me who wants to call it strong correlations or something like that where yeah there's enough people in the mix that they all they can't move without thinking about what each other are doing at the same time. Um interesting that's a that's that's a nice easy one to unpick. So there's something for everyone to think about on the 20 minute break. Thanks very much Stephen and thanks everyone for listening so far for this session. We're back in 20 minutes at 3:45. Uh so I will see many of you then. Thanks very much.