Hello again everyone. Um right we are back uh with the next talk from Sam Finnean Matt Grant uh which is on breaking free from templates why analysts should trust themselves with custom CSS in shiny apps. And as ever um feel free to talk in the chat but also add in any questions into the Q&amp;A. Thank you. Thank &gt;&gt; Can you all hear me? Okay, lovely. Great. Um, okay. So, hi everyone. Thanks for coming to our talk. Uh, so I'm Sam. This is Matt. Uh, and we are senior data and research analysts at [clears throat] Cancer Research UK. We work in the cancer intelligence team. So, if you're not familiar with that team, uh, we basically collect and analyze statistics right across the cancer pathway. So, from prevention, early diagnosis, core things like instance, mortality, understanding treatment outcomes, understanding survival outcomes, that kind of thing. We do this at the UK level, develop nation level and at the local level where data are available. And uh today we're as part of that we we we build quite a lot of shiny apps. Um and uh today we're going to share I hope some sort of nuggets of wisdom that we've learned along the way and about why uh why people who build these sorts of apps should trust themselves to use custom CSS. &gt;&gt; Sweet. So we thought to kind of get things started we would cover uh why we think it's worth learning CSS and then we'll go into each of these in more detail throughout the talk. So I think we kind of felt there were four really important points. Uh one is that the consistency of branding and styling on your app is really important to build instant trust with any users you've got that come to to your app. Uh the second is around the kind of the ease of actually learning CSS of itself. Um every website you visit uh can be a nice case example of of how to use CSS and we'll go through a little bit in this talk of how you can view the CSS for all of those sites and how you can learn from them and implement that into your own work. Another really important point that we think is kind of worth covering is CSS can be really really useful in allowing you to adapt to lots of different audience types. Um, especially if you're trying to adapt to desktop users versus mobile users for your apps. And then finally, kind of following on from that is that learning CSS directly means that you're going to have a lot more freedom to design your apps the way you want them and to kind of be the best versions they can be to communicate with your audiences. And so let's kind of delve into that point number one a little bit around building trust. um although users might not realize it, uh styling is going to be the very first thing they notice when they come to your app and how good that styling is kind of is really important in terms of uh how much trust they're going to have and how they then go on to view your data and interpret the information you have. So, you know, if you've got an app that has quite old styling, uh, for example, people might wonder, is this the latest data available? Has this app been updated? Is it being maintained? Or should I actually go and try and find my information elsewhere? Uh, another aspect might be that if you have a little bit of branding from your main organization, but it's not kind of consistent across your whole app, people might get a little bit worried, especially kind of in today's age where people are really worried about fishing and uh security of the kind of sites they visit. If your branding's a little bit wonky, they might then start to wonder like, "Oh, is this a really good source of information? Can I really trust this?" Um, or again, should I be going elsewhere? And so, if you see this is now the example of our apps today. Um, and the the previous one, this is what they look like before. What we hope is we can that you know when a user now looks at this they know that it's a lot more similar to our main website uh they know that they're still in the same place. They're still with the same organization that they trust and that when they actually look through our information they know it's information they can trust and take away and use. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So you might be looking at this and thinking I'm not a I'm not a web developer. Like I'm an analyst. I work in R. data. Um, but I think it's important to realize that actually Shiny is already translating our code under the hood into HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. So, HTML is handling the content and the structure of your page. So, if you have some text and a paragraph in HTML, that'll be in a P tag. If you have your headers, there'll be H1 or H2 tags. And then the CSS is controlling how those elements look, what colors they have, what fonts they use, the padding on some of the elements on the page, that kind of thing. Um, and then JavaScript, which we're not really going to talk about today, handles the sort of dynamic functionality. Um, so there's already quite a lot of support in this space for this kind of thing, for this custom design of apps. Um, using packages like BSL, um, brand.l, um, and shown mobile. a little bit. Um, we're not here to like poo poo these. These are these are really great tools. They're they're an excellent starting point and they can make an app look really professional really quickly, but we just want to kind of make you aware that like these things do come with their own constraints and their own limitations. Um, and if you kind of go out of the way to really build your own custom CSS, you have a lot more control over how an app that you build looks and feels. So hopefully that's enough for you guys to kind of uh trust us that this is worth doing. Let's move on to like how you actually going to do that. How to begin learning CSS. And so I touched on before that examples to learn from are everywhere all over the web across all of the websites you visit. In terms of actually getting access to the CSS for all these different websites, every browser you use is going to have its own inspect tool. All you have to do is right click on the web page and then go to inspect. Uh on some it might be inspect element or some kind of variation. This inspect tool is even available in our studio. So if you're running your app in the viewer, you can still right click in there and get access to the inspect tool. terms of what it actually looks like when you're using it. You'll see something like this. This is one of the shiny dashboards I've built previously. And so on the left hand side is the the web page that users will see. Then once you click the inspect tool, it will open up a couple of more panes. One will be the HTML view of your page. So this will be all your content and structure of your page. And then you can select an element within that HTML. um and it will show you all the CSS that's being applied to that specific element. And this is a really useful way to see what's being used where. And so if we look at our one of our main kind of.org web pages, um me and Sam kind of went to these and we were like, how do we bring this into our app? Um, and you can do the same inspect tool, get that same kind of view. And then if we look at, for example, above the title on this page, there's a little blue box that says health professionals. If I want, I can um select elements on the page itself. So there's a little icon just here. When you click that one, it will let you mouse over any element in a page and then see the information for that element. So for example, I've highlighted the health professional one and we get to see the information for that and then Sam will talk you through how you then bring that into your app. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So let's let's work through a practical example. So um here we've got on the left the the sort of main header area of the cancer research UK website and we want to copy this donate button. Uh, we want to get our buttons on our shiny apps to look like that donate button. Um, so as Matt was talking about, you can right click, go to inspect, and then you can see the CSS class that's attached to that button. And then you can see on the right here all of the attributes that are attached that are styling that uh class. Um, and at first glance, this looks kind of intimidating. There's there's quite a lot here. But one of the things that's really useful about the inspect tool is you can go in and you can tick and untick all of these little boxes. um and that will be reflected dynamically on the web page that you see. So you can it's a really good way of learning like what all of these things do um and you can edit them, you can change the colors and that will happen um live. Uh you can also then do a little bit of googling and as much as it pains me to admit it, you can ask AI. It's quite good in this area to help. Um I know I did a lot when I started learning this. Um so you've got the element that you want to copy. You then need to figure out how to target the element on your app that you want to change. So, uh we've got here on the left um an example of the default styling of a radio group button from the shiny widgets package. And you can see here we've inspected it exactly the same way as we can do on the website. And you get these button radio button button default active classes. Um so then you can tinker with this directly in the in the inspect view. again make all the changes that you want that you've learned from the your previous practical example and you can see that live and then you can copy paste all of that directly into a stylesheet that you then call in your app using tags link um so this is great this is a really good way of learning but I will admit it does sometimes get a little bit frustrating um so sometimes you have additional styling brought in from elsewhere so uh you can see again this default shiny widgets radio group button on the left in the bottom left just next to it is that exact same element and the only difference is at the start of my app I librally brings in all of this additional styling from BSlib. You can see on the right here all of these little attributes with BS at the front of them. They're all part of the BSL package. Um so sometimes you end up having to kind of fight other styling libraries and it can be a little bit tricky to untangle. Um, and then the main key part of this also is figuring out exactly what uh element you want to target. So I did some very careful cropping earlier when I showed you a styled button. Uh, and that's because the edits I made only actually applied to the active version of the button, not the inactive button. And that's because the active button has this additional class that I was styling directly. Probably what I should have done is styled the inactive one and then added some styling on the active one. But I think this plus the figuring out um you know how to override the other elements draw brought in from other packages, it can be a little bit tough to untangle. And again, as much as it pains me to admit it, AI is quite useful here. Um so one of the things you can do, for example, is uh literally screenshot your your whole page, your whole inspect pane, drop it into an AI and be like, "Hey, why isn't this working?" Um, and most of the time it gives you a pretty good answer that at the very least will help you troubleshoot. &gt;&gt; Okay, so hopefully that's helped you understand how you're going to go about learning CSS and some of the intro bits to that. Um, but one of the important things of of learning more and be able to do that is making sure that you can accommodate different users needs in your dashboards. And so when we were working on ours, we were having a great time using Shiny and it made great sense for us, but we did some user research and the end user experience wasn't quite there. Um, we worked with kind of some of our teams in house to do this and we got some lovely feedback along the way. Um, you know, we had people saying great things about our charts, which is everything we want to hear. people really liking the information in it, saying they'd use it on a regular basis. However, there were also a fair few gripes within it. We were seeing lots of people saying things around, you know, they were mentioning the styling being different to our main website um and kind of questioning why that was or saying that, oh yeah, once I learn how to use it, I'll really value this. And we kind of felt we don't want people to have to learn how to use our tool. We want them to arrive at our tool and get on with it and get access to the information. That's why we built these things in the first place. Um even worse than that, the experience was terrible on mobile. Um our beautiful lovely shards that we worked so hard on um looked really janky on mobile. You had elements that over overlapped the title. Um, you know, fonts were unreadable. Uh, and we also had a real issue with our main menu. So, we had a a sort of landing page and a sidebar menu that I think a lot of people were used to in shiny apps. Uh, and a lot of people just didn't even realize how to press this tiny little burger button here to open it in the first place. So, they couldn't even get around our app. Um, that was a real issue. uh especially because some analytics that we had showed us that maybe up to half of our users were on mobile. Um so yeah, this is something we really needed to solve. Um and I think part of our change in thinking that helped us solve that a little bit was to to realize that users valued the information that we had. They really valued the charts. They really valued the information, but they were working too they had to work too hard to get to it. So we needed to present that information in a format that was familiar to them. So that got us thinking that we should build our apps to look and feel more like a website. So this on the right is one of the apps that Matt showed you earlier that Matt and I worked on. And it's uh it's laid out a bit like a website. It has a sort of similar header, a similar navigation system. And this meant that our users didn't really have to think about learning the dashboard, learning how to use it. They could just get the information they needed. Uh and this is something we accomplish with kind of a combination of R and CSS specific things. So we just talk about some of the the R specific things first of all. Um there are some really simple ones like uh the charts. We can just use an if else and our so we're using plotly here. We can just pull in the screen size or the child size and use an if else to say look if the uh window size is below a certain size uh use smaller margins, use smaller fonts, uh maybe even change the orientation of the chart and it's quite a simple approach that I think people will be familiar with but it makes a big difference. Um, and then for the other main issue that we had of the navigation, um, we had to really think about the the homepage, the landing page that people get to when they first came on our app. Um, so this is the local stats hub that Matt built. And one of the things that he did early on was change um that landing page to have a lot of key statistics right on the front page in these little value boxes. Uh and on desktop they would be arranged like two or three of rest. Um all the information you need kind of in one glance and then on mobile uh well across both things we have this uh function from BS layout column wrap that allows us to reorient that information. So on mobile those two or three boxes go underneath each other and people can scroll like they used to on their phone and then they can use on click to click on those boxes and navigate around the app. So that meant that people didn't even have to bother with the uh the side menu at all. Uh but that's kind of some things, but some other things, better menu navigation, it really did require more custom CSS. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So let's look at those CSS ones. Um and some of the approaches within these will mirror some of the approaches you've just seen for Sam's RV solutions. So one example again from our main website was that our main website uses a lot of negative space either side and then it keeps the kind of central column um a certain width and so we can bring this in with CSS. Uh so it was these kind of four lines of CSS was all we needed to do that. We would put a div, we would put all of our content inside that div. Um, and then we would give it a maximum width and we would use some CSS to say automatically figure out what the negative space should be. And then when it resizes on different windows, it's going to take that width out of the negative space and keep it from the central one. On mobile, we needed a slightly different setup for the same div. Um, similar to Sam was saying about reorganizing elements that at one point were next to each other. We want them to be one on top of each other. So, if we look at the example here, we've got these pink selector buttons. We don't have space on mobile to put them next to each other anymore. So, we want to reorientate them and we can do that using these other couple of lines. So, we change the display value and we change some of the padding so there's not so much space around the elements. The thing you still need to figure out here though is how you're going to make that difference between desktop and mobile. And the answer is to use media queries. These are kind of like a an if function that's specific to screen sizes and within CSS. So all I did was wrap one in a minimum width uh that would kind of match desktop sizes and then wrapped the other one in a maximum width where anything below that width we show them the mobile view instead. And this is a really nice way of adapting those different elements to those different user bases. We might also want to change the actual kind of structure a bit more. Um, and so another really useful thing to learn within CSS to approach that is something called flexbox. By default, this is a thing that will kind of shrink and grow in specific ways um so that it will adapt to different screen sizes and make your layout kind of nice uh across those. On desktop, we want, you know, for example, our navbar, we want everything in a nice row because you've got that big wide screen and you want to make the most of that space. But on mobile, we need it to automatically reorient itself. Um, and all we really need to do again is use a media query and then change the flex direction variable. Um, and like Sam said, if you're not sure which variables to change or what to put in what media query, there's loads of really good tutorials out there. You've got the inspect tool to look at other websites and you can use AI to check in and be like, I've tried this. I've tried another 14 different ways and it's still not working. Please help. And often it gets you going in the right direction. So hopefully in this short presentation we've kind of convinced you that there's a lot of value to learning the CSS directly that while you can do some of this in R and you can kind of get a long way with using those R functions to do it all you really kind of want to embrace the CSS. if you want to use it yourself. And it will also mean that when you have those functions in R that are using CSS principles, you're going to understand them more intuitively and you're going to make be able to make the best use of those. We thought it might also be useful to end this talk with a little bit of uh active takeaways for you all. So um we thought we'd list three things you could try this week. So have a look on any of the websites you're on, open the inspect tool, see what you can see, uh explore it, copy one of those things over to one of your own, uh, apps and see how it applies differently to yours, and then once you've kind of got to grips with that, try adding a media query into it and see what it looks like on mobile. Um, always try and remember, get user feedback because we found out so many times people use things differently to how you do and in ways you don't expect. Um, yeah, that's us. Please feel free to to reach out to us anytime. Find us uh on LinkedIn or email us and we've got some QR codes with our work here. Um, but yeah, I think that's it for today. Thank you all for listening and we'll go to some questions. &gt;&gt; Thanks Sam and Matt. That was great. Um yes, we've got a few questions in the uh Q&amp;A. So um two kind of linked ones. One one of which which I should know the answer to. I have just checked but I don't know. Um which is about sharing slides. I'm not sure if there's a plan to share slides for all the presentations afterwards but um I will find that out and I'll try and kind of answer that. But if you guys are happy to share your slides in another way then that would be good to know. And then a related question someone's asked if your code is published online eg on GitHub or somewhere like that where they can see it. [snorts] &gt;&gt; Yeah. So some of it is so I know for example we've got the local brow screening tool and that's available online. Um we it's one of the things we want to do more of and get it all over and publicly available but we just we keep going to other priorities first. Um, so if there's any specific bits you see of our work and you're like, I want to see more or I want to know how they did it. I'd encourage everyone just reach out to us, get in touch and we'll sort things out. &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks. And obviously email addresses are on the, uh, slide there. So, uh, time for a quick answer to another question which is around processes. What processes do you have for testing and fixing shinies accessibility issues? for example, keyboard navigation, assisted technologies, vision impairments, things like that. &gt;&gt; Yeah, this is something we are uh kind of new to to be honest. We're we were pretty naive in this area and but we're really trying to uh get a little bit better. So, we are making using this using um there's a uh lighthouse is a a system that can go through on Google and see our accessible pages. There's also um a tool called wave where you can uh install it as a browser extension. uh right click on it and it will um show you any uh anything you've got on your app that doesn't have uh alt text for example or um kind of anything like that like elements that don't that don't have anything underneath it when they should that kind of thing. Um so that's really useful tool. Uh, and then the other one is just kind of going through it with, for example, screen readers. Um, just installing a screen reader, looking how it, you know, how it goes through your app, how you can get through it, uh, with a with a keyboard navigation. Um, and just sort of play like whack-a-ole, I think. Um, we are, but we are just starting in this area. It's something where, um, our future apps are going to be a little bit better at this. &gt;&gt; Great. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Um, okay. So poor stop there but thanks again for a great talk Sam and Matt really appreciate it. Um if anyone does want to kind of continue on any these issues then there is the kind of like lounge networking function within the conference as well where you can kind of talk to people and post con uh questions as well. Um but yes thanks again and um good to have you on the conference. &gt;&gt; Thanks for having us. Thanks all.