So our next uh session the title is assessing health inequality health inequalities for weight times to discharge in a at two hospital trusts in the west midlands. So it's going to be Carla Bailey, senior population health intelligence specialist and Jason Gwynet, principal population health intelligence specialist both at the Royal Wolverampton NHS uh trust. So I'll pass over to you both now. Thank you. Hi. Yeah. Can you hear me? &gt;&gt; Yep. &gt;&gt; Hello. Can you see my slides? &gt;&gt; Yes. If you can hear me, I can see your slides and hear you. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. Great. So, I'll kick off then. Um, so hello. Hello all. Thanks for joining us. Um, so my name is Carla and myself and Jason are population health intelligence specialists from Wolverampton and we'll take you through our analysis of weight times in A&amp;E at Wars and Wolverampton uh using a machine learning approach. So what was the ask? So during the pandemic healthcare activity was uh massively displaced leading to pressures in access to services in the years following leading to a large focus on recovery and we feel often the focus in healthcare is about absolute numbers. So overall 4hour weight targets numbers and waiting lists and we feel that inequality and access can often be overlooked. So in October 2024, the Nfield Trust released a quality watch long read exploring weight times in A&amp;E and they found possible variations in weight times by key demographic themes including longer weights experience for black, Asian and mixed ethnicity children. So the Nfield analysis have carried out limited multivariate analysis. However, they acknowledged a more in-depth analysis to examine their findings would be useful and it was requested that we looked at this uh locally. So this was one of the key findings from the Nfield report. So a chart show mean average time to departure from A&amp;E by age and ethnicity showing longer weights by age and for black and Asian naugh to 19 year olds and black 20 to 69 year olds. So the approach we wanted to look at the variation in overall weight time to discharge in A&amp;E. Um SQL was used to query and transform the data set into a usable data set for analysis. Um, so data from April 22 to March 24 was extracted. &gt;&gt; I'm sorry. Sorry to interrupt, but your your slides aren't moving in. I think you need to go back into presenter mode. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, this was the chart that I mentioned about mean average time of departure from A&amp;E uh showing uh longer weights for ethnic minority children in the younger groups. So, the approach as I mentioned um I'll carry on from from the last bit. So we used Excel initially to analyze and then we wanted to use R and Python and independent analysis from both myself and Jason and to compare the results and this was just to enhance on um current modeling techniques that we that we use and to use um a machine learning approach which is like better suited to large complex data. Okay. So the explorative analysis so weights um were left skewed with significant longer weights and the mean weight time was 256 minutes compared to um 173 minutes. Uh there were large var variations in weight time linked to age um whether admitted and patient acuity. So the severity of um the attendance reason um and there's some variation in weight times between gender and ethnicity and there were differences between hospital trust despite them broadly covering the same patch. So Warsaw and Wolverampton. So this was the Excel chart that we managed to replicate by Nfield, but we could split it uh further by age groups. So showing some um longer weights for ethnic minority children, but we wanted to expand on this and look at some other of the confounding factors. So the multivariate analysis approach, the dependent variable was total weight time from arrival to discharge in minutes. outlier weights um were removed and weights of longer than 24 hours and zero weights um were move removed also and we decided to remove missing data for um uh discharge group and gender um because this was small numbers but for deprivation ethnicity and acuity a category of unknown was included in the model as this was larger numbers so as I mentioned Python versus R two separate analyses and it was quite a lengthy piece of work but due to the lightning talk we'll just go through a small snap snapshot of what we did now. So the actual approach um continued. So we wanted to try and use approach of machine learning and traditional um statistics. Um but this can often be based on just um assumptions um and theories. So we wanted to stretch that a little bit more. Um the actual difference between Python and R uh the the data split was 80 to 20% in Python and 70 to 30% in R. the independent variables. So dem key demographics, age, gender, ethnicity, deprivation, quintile and then things around the attendance itself. So arrival time, discharge group, acuity admitted, month of mission and winter flag. And for our um arrival day, financial year and arrival group was also used. The data preparation was a little different. So in Python ACT was numerically encoded and for um in R it was left as a categorical variable and also I thought it was important to um cyclally encode arrival hour. So there's a relationship between 12:00 and 1:00 a.m. which is important for A&amp;E attendances. So uh the model is used um I said a mixture of uh traditional and machine learning in Python. linear regression was used as a base approach just to just to demonstrate that it was um wasn't suitable and then treebased methods were used. So random forest and gradient boost and then in R initially a parcel model was um used um as this is better best suited to count data but it showed over over dispersion so variance larger than the mean and this is due to the longer weights. So a negative binomial was then used. Um and whilst this gave nicely um an easy to interpret coefficients um treebased methods were were adopted um just to try and improve on predictability and accuracy. Uh the models uh were assessed using um uh R squared and for R um residues were also looked at and for Python some partial dependency plots look at the relationship between the independent and dependent variables. Um and Jason is now going to take uh you through the uh the results. &gt;&gt; Okay. Thank you Connor. I think um um rather than me trying to show my slides again, can I just tell you to move them on card? It might be easier. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay then. Sure. That's fine. Hopefully you can see the results right now. &gt;&gt; I can I can see now. Can people hear me? &gt;&gt; Take that as a yes. Okay. &gt;&gt; I can hear you. So &gt;&gt; brilliant. If you can hear me, everyone else can hear me as well. So, okay. So, the following um charts contain a selection of our key findings using um both approaches. As Carla said, we've not included I think it would take way too long to go through it all. Um, these summary tables here are comparing the model assessment for both approaches. Root mean square error shows the average size of the prediction error. It's quite large in this instance because the data is so heavily skewed and long weights are impacting on this error. Given this, we felt mean absolute error more appropriate in assessing model fit. um it's less it's less sensitive to extreme weights. So so both approaches it's lower than the RNC but it's still high for all models when we consider that the medium weight in A&amp;E overall is 173 minutes. So in terms of model accuracy you can see that threebased models such as random forest gradient boost and XG boost show improvement on baseline models. Um it's not substantial though and we think there's probably possible data ceiling with these models. Um predictive accuracy um is still pretty reasonable um as measured by our square um given skewing the data. Um we felt the hospital data is rarely normally distributed and given our main aim was not to predict weight time to a high degree of accuracy but to determine what factors if any impact weight time we can clearly this is sort of satisfactory what we were looking at. It's also worth mentioning that in the real world even sophisticated models struggle to explain these high variance in predictions. So next slide, Cara. So this is an extra a series of plots that Cola did in R and they look at the residuals plotted for each model. It just demonstrates how hard it is to predict. Um you slightly get a better um pattern for XG boost. So next slide on again. So these these charts show feature importance for both approaches. There's a relative measure that how important each variable is in the model. Um the charts of gradient boost as displayed here in Python and XG boost for ARM. Both approaches highlight patient admitted and age are overwhelmingly the most important factors on weight time. Acuity comes out as more important. Python approach whereas arrival group emergency ambulance is more important for R. both show similar importance of time of arrival and discharge group assessment but both proof of missing depation not to be important which is key thing we we were looking at. So the next slide is these are the um partial dependence plots that I did in Python a nice visualization technique that show individual impacts of the variable on weight time the direction shows the effect on weight. So here an upward trajectory shows the variable is correlated with increasing weight and vice versa and a flat line crucially shows no effect. So you can see here there's a strong relationship between time and age and emitted flag and accurity. There's also a link between weight time stream assessment. Next slide. And then arrival time is also showing some impact on weight time. But crucially what we're most interested in ethnicity and deprivation do not seem to be impacting on weight time. So next slide. So in in conclusion then we were able to reassure decision makers that there was no large equity issue by deprivation and ethnicity at least on A&amp;E waiting times. Um the focus can now shift to other potential areas where inequality is a factor such as people leaving A&amp;E before being seen treatment where we've looked at initial univariant analysis and this suggests potential possibility of disparity. Um quite a crucial thing for us is that we were able to apply machine learning methods inhouse. Um a more traditional approach in R and a more pure machine learning focused approach in Python. Um, we've had experience before where external companies are bought in to do similar pieces of work. Um, often these can be presented as a black box where we presented with findings and there's no way to really appraise the outputs or methods used to a high degree. Um, which model works best? We felt in this um, instance they're both quite similar which is quite reassuring. Um, Python approach is slightly quicker. Um but we do think that where you have time it's worth using a combination of both. Um a key finding we found is that it's quite difficult to simplify the findings of such complicated and nuance analysis and often a quick answer is required and expected. Also we find that senior managers can prefer a BI dashboard approach and our outputs don't really fit that style. We're more about the interpretation rather than pretty outputs. Um limitations we we may be missing many predictive variables and in fact the R squared showing that such as where on a given day baseline virus activity, GP appointment availability. Some of these are not routinely available. Um we also thought about using additional approaches like deep learning and machine learning and fine-tuning but we were constrained by time and capacity and storage and processing limitations. I did try running fine tuning but after half an hour it was just running on and on and on and getting nowhere because of the size of the model we're using. It's easy though to go down rabbit holes and keep trying to improve and improve on models. Sometimes you need to accept the data, especially complex hospital data, is not going to conform exactly to one model. Not all models will be able to explain all variability. So, next slide. So, thank you. And that's a quick run through and any questions from the audience. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thanks very much, uh, Carla and Jason. Um we are at time now so we might not quite have time for questions because we are going into a break but if you did have any time to respond to the questions in the chat um that would be really helpful but yeah really really interesting uh presentation so thanks okay thank you um