There. Perfect. Yes, there we go. Thank you. Um, yeah, good afternoon everyone. Uh, nice to see everyone here. Um, so leader and I will be talking about our process developing an environmental sustainability dashboard to drive datadriven action towards net zero. So kicking off with a little bit of context. Um we're from Manchester University Foundation Trust and we're one of the largest acute trusts in the country. We sit across Manchester and Trafford with 10 hospitals and two local care organizations in the realm of 30,000 staff uh and caring for about 34 of a million people across Greater Manchester and beyond. Uh so the point really being that this vast range of health care activity has a huge associated environmental impact. Our carbon footprint as defined by NHS England as the emissions we are directly in control of is 74,000 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent financial year and it's about the equivalent of 2,700 average UK households. We've been calculating this carbon footprint uh since 2019 at least annually and I will pass over to leader to give a bit of background on how we did it. &gt;&gt; Thank you Megan. Uh good afternoon everyone. We were working with sustainability data scattered across multiple teams and sources each using different formats and structure and almost entirely managed in Excel or PDFs. For example, uh waste data came from over 20 different supplier invoices, each formatted differently. To get any insight, someone had to manually consolidate and clean everything. So, slow inconsistence and prone to errors. The carbon footprinting tool had hundreds of linked formulas and were extremely easy to rig and only a couple of uh people understood it well enough to maintain. And that meant reporting was quarterly trust level only and not accessible to the people who needed it most. This work um addresses a fundament a fundamental challenge. Um data across the trust is often scattered between departments and not used to its full potential. Previously um results sat within the sustainability team and were difficult to share. Now through the dashboard, we can publish insights safely and securely to senior leadership and operational managers in real time and at a much more detailed level than ever before. Recognizing this uh sustainability and digital estate came together with a shared aim to improve accessibility, reliability and safest storage of our data by moving away from fragile spreadsheets toward Power Apps and PowerBI with a pathway for future automation. To guide the work uh as you can see we adopted a structure to cycle plan, design, develop, test, release and back. At the planning stage, we set a clear vision and broke it into manageable iterative pieces. Workshops with operational users helped uh define what each section needed to show and what would generally support decision making. We assessed data quality, aggregated schema and designed the data storage. So manual handling was kept to a minimum. All transformations, mappings, and calculations were moved into PowerBI allowing us to produce outputs instantly instead of spending hours in Excel. [snorts] Testing was a critical part of the process. Uh we shared early drafts with the waste team gathered feedback on what worked and what didn't and refine the visuals and calculation based on their daily day dayto-day experience. This iterative approach made the dashboard not only technically accurate but genuinely useful. Of course, there were challenges. We were dealing with data in completely different formats, structures, and ownership. Cleaning and unifying it was a significant task. Engaging wider teams also took time as many processes had been unchanged for years. We overcame this by dedicating resources on both sides digital state and sustainability and by upskilling the team to ensure long-term resilience. I can say early engagement secured buying and kept the development aligned with real operational needs. Um, for me the key achievement has been turning a very manual fragmented system into a shared reliable platform built through genuine collaboration and an approach that prioritize accessibility, consistency, and long-term sustainability of the data. We've already integrated some sections of carbon footprinting calculation into PowerBI and they're working in the dashboard. The next step is expanding this to create a full detailed crosswide view of our carbon footprint across waste, energy, medicine. &gt;&gt; Thanks, Lita. Um, so to demonstrate a bit of a success story, we'll have a jump into waste. So while this was a relatively small component of the direct carbon footprint, it had huge or operational and compliance gains to be made. We receive about 70 PDFs per week describing the waste collected plus monthly waste invoices information from over 20 suppliers in different formats. The huge challenge was the lack of consistency across the data. Before the dashboard, we were relying on manual typing out of the PDF information which was not being analyzed uh and also copy and paste pivot table jobs to get any information from the invoices. Using the process Leela described, we've consolidated the data into a consistent structure to get the waste dashboard you can see on the screen. Overall, this has saved us about 27 working days per year and has massively improved compliance and monitoring, including mandatory reporting to NHS England. But one of the most exciting bits about this is it's helped really turn strategy into real world outcomes. Using this dashboard, the waste team were able to track sitebased waste production and particularly segregation patterns for clinical waste disposal, which you can see in the top graph. Based on NHS clinical waste strategy, acute hospitals are targeted with 60% clinical waste segregated for energy from waste disposal. And that's the black dotted line you can see on the graph. By reviewing weekly and monthly segregation performance, the team targeted low performing sites with training audits and walkarounds. And this is something that would just not have been possible to target pre- dashboard. You can see on the top graph in the space of a few months, the segregation patterns drastically shifted with this site in question regularly beating the 60% target. It's also great news for our carbon emissions. For every ton of waste shifted out of alternative treatment, the line in orange, um, where clinically appropriate, of course, uh, into energy from waste disposal, we save 352 kg of carbon dioxide equivalent from our footprint. Clinical waste disposal is one of the most carbonintensive forms of waste disposal. So you can see the whole waste carbon footprint of the site nose dive in line with the drop in alternative treatment in that bottom graph. Energy from waste is also significantly cheaper. So this project really helped extensive carbon and cost savings. This is just one example of operational and strategic benefits from more accessible and sitebased analysis. Uh and as leader said, we're working on expanding this to cover the full carbon footprint. But why talk about carbon? Well, the perhaps drier answer of this is that the NHS as a whole is legally committed to reaching net zero under the Health and Care Act 2022. When we say net zero, we mean reducing our emissions by as much as possible with some offsetting of impossible to remove emissions right at the end. Perhaps the more interesting and compelling reason though for talking about carbon is that a greener NHS is a better health care system for our patients, staff and communities. When we think about health care systems where we're using resources efficiently, delivering care close to home and preventing hospitalization, this is a lower carbon and lower cost system. Every aspect of the NHS's 10-year plan fits with sustainable improvement as does the theme of today's conference with health and care systems of the future. So, I definitely encourage you all as experts in your field to consider how you can build sustainable sustainability and environmental measures in your analysis. We know that all healthcare activity has an associated carbon cost. So, how can we think collectively about spending that carbon wisely? Thank you very much and leader for a great talk there. And uh we got a couple of questions in already which is fantastic. So the first one uh is how did you extract data from PDFs for input into your dashboard? Oh, an excellent question. Um, and one of our more showy bits of the process, I think. So, this is where we integrated AI into ripping some of the information off. Um, it is completely reliant on a very consistent format. Um but yes I can I can definitely provide more sort of in-depth information but yeah effectively AI tools &gt;&gt; a good use of AI excellent [laughter] [gasps] &gt;&gt; using sparingly but it has been &gt;&gt; no that's really good to hear and a second question are there any negative impacts on patients using alternative lowcarbon treatments or any negative impacts on other environmental systems ustainability um things like air pollutant emissions. &gt;&gt; A really good question. Um I think when we think about it in general and it really linked well into the into the last presentation actually about um considering the environment alongside cost and patient outcome. So I think it's a very ad hoc and kind of project by project approach we take that it is while we think about spending carbon wisely um we have patience at the heart of what we do in terms of uh the waste question specifically or the waste example. um it doesn't have any direct impacts on our patients in terms of the way that that clinical waste is disposed of. All of the bins are kind of present in the room. So, it's really a staff behavioral change about um making the right choices in the moment. So, hopefully not noticeable to patients in that case. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, good point. And uh just in the attendee chat, there's another question if you could answer it uh quickly. Uh where do uh this person get carbon data usage information from? Do all suppliers have to include it on an invoice for example for waste? Uh yes. Then suppliers are supposed to send you that information. So um like leader said a lot of this work comes off the back of relationship building. So definitely get in touch with your suppliers um push them to be providing that data in easy to use formats. I would say [snorts] &gt;&gt; that's a really great example and uh great that you're talking today at this conference so that you can share that what you've done with other NHS trusts as well. I'm sure a lot of people will be in touch. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yeah, definitely welcome it. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. And um yeah, do stay on if you can just to answer I think there's some more questions in the Q&amp;A as well. So if yeah, if you could that'd be great and answer those um off camera. Um, we'll go to our next speaker