Yeah, I'm here &gt;&gt; and I can hear you. Can you hear me? Yes. So, &gt;&gt; yeah, I've been listening to the last 10 minutes of Sally as well. So, &gt;&gt; great. Okay. Um, so if I could introduce I mean I don't need to introduce Manny, do I? I mean, um, Penny is is the fairly recently um appointed chair of NHS England. um has delivered a a a raft of important national reports in recent times whilst also chairing an ICB and and has decades of experience in in working with and supporting the NHS. I think I I first came across you Penny probably 25 years ago like that. Um but the thing I want to really recognize is that when I contacted Penny to ask if she could spare some time for Hacker, she just said yes. Instantly she said, "Yes, that would be I'd love to do that. That would be really exciting. It sounds really great." Now, that matters. That really matters a lot because this is this is a relatively undervalued community, the analytical community. And yet, you read any of the national documents and they tell us how important uh an improved analytically driven decision-m thing is for the NHS. So, the fact that Penny prioritized a time which I'm sure is under a huge amount of competing pressures to come and and present here um is really noted and and make and and matters this community. So thank you for that and and um and over to you um and we love to hear what you tell us. &gt;&gt; Thanks Peter. And can everyone hear me? Okay. I'll assume it's okay unless you say something. So uh shout if it's not. So first of all thank you for uh inviting me Peter and yes um I I am pleased to be here because I'm a you know big advocate for analytics and actually if we had better analytics uh based on better data we would actually uh be able to answer far more of the questions that are out there. I actually think that we have got a lot of data already. we just don't necessarily do the analysis on it. So, you know, you are the group, you're the converted people, we need to convert everybody else. So, I'll come on and talk about some of that. What I thought I might do is given it's uh nearly Christmas, take a bit out of uh whatever it is, Charles Dickens, and do Christmas's past, present, and future. So, as Peter said, I've been working in and around healthcare for a very long time because I'm old. And in about 1985, and I assume many people, if not most people in the room, weren't even born then. But around that time, I started to work as a medical student on the wards. And for whatever reason, what struck me in a way that didn't necessarily strike some of my colleagues was that each consultant had a different way of treating patients. So, some of them would order some tests. Uh, just the example you just referred to, Peter, you know, not back then, they wouldn't have done double cataracts at the same time, but you know, the equivalent sort of thing. Some people might operate on a procedure in one way, some people might do that in another way. And I just thought, this is a bit odd. um and why is it like that and why aren't we collecting some data and looking at what the differences are between these different approaches. Uh so I got really interested in that at a at an early stage and then increasingly also got interested in not just the clinical approaches but also the operational approaches. Why do we organize things like this? Why do we organize things like that? Um and so my interest in sort of data and analysis started at an early stage and what was great for me was in the 1990s the concept of clinical audit came along. So suddenly I didn't feel alone. There were lots of people in the late 80s early 90s who were starting to ask the same question. It was still very much a minority but there were people there were high-profile people like Don Burwick in the US quite a few people in the Royal Colleges people like Nick Black at London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine all of whom started to say we've got some data we should start to look at that data and we should start to compare and contrast. So that was great and that started to make a really big difference because we started to expose and I'll deliberately use that word some of these really big variations in quality of care. Um and that started to lead in the '9s to looking at different service models and so on. Uh as all of you know it takes an awful long time for change to happen but that change has happened over the last 30 years and as a result we've got much better services. But one particular moment within those 30 years is a real standout moment for me and that is the NHS plan which was published in 2000 and I at the time was working as director of strategy um at the department which was joint with NHS England at the time and um was very involved in that plan and one of the things I thought was the most positive bit about it was that the first chapter started with some data and analysis. And I look back at all of the previous documents that have been written about future of the NHS and big policy documents. None of them had started with data. So that was quite a seminal moment. That was the first time that the department, the government was willing to put out some data that said the way in which we are delivering health care, the quality of healthcare is not as good as it could be. Never been done before. but an absolutely crucial moment which then went on to describe different elements of the plan. Now the analysis I'd still say wasn't quite as robust as it could have been. It wasn't quite as punchy as it could have been, but at least it set uh a bit of a changing tone then for what really has then happened over the last 25 years, which was to substantially accelerate the use of data and analysis in the way that we think about healthcare. So that's my description of the past. And if I get to the present, where are we now? And then I'll come on to the future. So where are we now? We're in an interesting position now because we have got lots of data. We've done a much better job at collecting data over the last 25 years. Interestingly, a lot of the naysayers around clinical audit and data collection that is still there, but it's a lot quieter now than it was 25 years ago or 35 years ago when it was very noisy. So, we've got more willingness to collect data and share data. We've got the girth data. We've got all of the various national clinical audits uh and so on. And we've also got an awful lot of operational data. So, we've got that data and we are slowly to your point Peter I think starting to recognize the importance of analytical skills to do something with that data. I would say we are nowhere near where we need to be. uh we do nothing like uh enough analysis um to inform decision making but we are starting to get there and we're starting to recognize it and so I just wanted to point to a few sort of areas um and say where where do we have the data where do we have some of the tools um but where could we do a better job of using it so the first is population health so very much has been sort of flavor of the last 5 years 10 years lots of people developing lots of different population health tools from Optum to HN Health Navigator through to different consulting companies and so on. Palanteer now starting to do a bit of it. Um Quantexa a sort of UK big analytical company starting to do it. So lots of people doing it uh and it's great and we can you know everyone can go around and say 60 6% of the population uses 6% of the resources and so on. But our challenge with our population health tools is that we don't use them. So we put the data out there, everyone talks about the data, but we don't say so what. And if you went to other countries, it is starkly different. So other countries use the data to then plan services, to schedule services, to organize services such that I was picking up on the question that Peter asked Sally. It is completely the norm in other countries to have differential lengths of GP appointments based on need. And interestingly, many countries have far less GP appointments than we have. So actually they don't have such a high demand for GPS because they are scheduling care. They are organizing care around the needs of the population. And many of our people who have high needs do not need to see a GP. They typically need to see a care navigator, sometimes a care worker, sometimes an occupational therapist, sometimes a physio, sometimes a pharmacist. And so what other countries do is they use population health management tools to then inform and to directly link into their scheduling tools, their workforce management tools, and their planning tools. So that's a big area for me. It's a fantastic we've got the population health management data. we now need to use it to organize our services. The next bit is operational data. So we are a wash with operational data as everyone in the room will know. We've got tons of data but we don't use it. So not many people in the country realize that we have seen a significant increase in capacity in our A&amp;Es and we have seen a modest increase in demand. That is not the story that you read in the press. It's not the story that people think, but we've got the data that shows that. What we haven't done is then analyze that data and to say, well, what is happening with flow? What is happening in those A&amp;E departments that they feel busy, they feel frenetic, uh they don't feel like they've got this big increase in numbers of staff per patient, which they have. If we went back to about 20034, we had through the modernization agency fantastic ways of analyzing that data in terms of what was happening in A&amp;E departments and the A1 majority went through major operational improvement with significant improvement in throughput without adding a significant increase in staff. So we again we have lots and lots of operational data but we don't use it. We've seen length of stay increase by one and a half days on average over the last few years. We're not pinpointing what's the cause of that. And so you can speak to many chief execs who will tell you it's because we we struggle with capacity outside of hospitals to discharge people into. But you can also speak to many chief exacts who tell you that's not the problem. We have plenty of capacity. The problem is our own operational processes in our hospitals. And the list goes on. So that data is there and is very usable. We actually have more data than we think in mental health, but many people know it's not quite as well developed and it's not quite as well analyzed. We have loads of data in primary care, but we do not analyze that at all. So, we haven't really done any work on what is an operationally efficient model primary care. And so, again, if I just pick up on the comment made earlier, there is absolutely no reason whatsoever why continuity would ever be impacted by moving to larger primary care at scale. It doesn't make sense. The maths don't add up to say that. In fact, continuity would improve because you've got uh an organization that is working at scale with a far broader range of staff, much longer opening hours, much easier to schedule around people's needs. So, we need to start to look at that operational data in all aspects of care, not just in our hospitals. My next bit of analysis is around cost. We have lost control of cost. So, again, we collect lots of data. We do not know where every single pound is spent across the NHS. And we need to know we need to know exactly how much is spent on each square meter of space. What level of utilization we have of that and what level of utilization over 60 hours a week, 98 hours a week, 168 hours a week. We do not routinely look at that and as a result we have very poor utilization of buildings. We don't have a clear sense of what do we really need and we struggle to actually understand the cost component of the estates. But we also struggle to understand the cost component of all other uh aspects of services. We do have good data on clinical outcomes. But what we don't do is put those two together and say what does the healthcare value equation look like. We do it for drugs. There's obviously a lot in the news at the moment about NICE and the way in which NICE evaluates drugs. And as uh you all know NICE uses a £30,000 per qual. If we looked at other aspects of our care, uh they would um be considerably less than £30,000 of quali, but many of them, but many of them would be considerably more than £30,000 of quali. So why aren't we looking at that? Why aren't we thinking through what is the healthare value equation here? Why aren't we using the principles of healthare value? both looking at above the line, how good are the clinical outcomes, but also below the line, what's the unit cost of delivering every aspect of care. So, we've got the data to do it, but it's not in common parliament. It's not something that we're using day in day out to inform uh our commissioning plans and our delivery plans. And then my final one is on user experience. So any other consumerf facing industry would collect user data um in a far more substantive way than we do but even more importantly it would analyze it. So we do not start routinely board meetings by looking at a whole piece of analysis about what's happened in terms of our users. What's their experience of care? What are the things that they find as little bug bears? You know whether it's not being able to get through on the phone or not being able to find a wheelchair if they turn up at the hospital. It's not something that we have in common parliament but it needs to be. So how do we again take the information that we do collect actually expand that use things like the NHS app and get a much greater sense of uh what people really think. So those are all the things I think we could be doing here and now. We've got the data we've got the analytical skills and capabilities and we need to do it. And then I come on to the future. Well as people here know significant aspects of the future already here. We've already got all sorts of amazing AI. The world has the potential to be so different and at the moment we're quite cautious about how we use it. And maybe that's sensible, maybe it's not. But if we look at things like even relatively basic AI like ambient voice technology, that has such an amazing potential to transform health care uh and to again allow us to have much better insights into how we're delivering health care. uh we have the ability to actually uh prevent far more conditions. So I had a fascinating presentation uh last week from a major Indian cardiac provider where every single patient on their wards is monitored uh 24 hours a day 7 days a week. Tiny little device that does realtime monitoring everyone is listed as red amber green depending on that monitoring uh they can spot any heart attack 6 hours before it happens. This is a major cardiac unit. So they are used to having cardiac arrests. They don't have them anymore because the continual monitoring identifies when they're going to happen with 6 hours notice. Absolutely staggering. And it's also reduced the numbers of nurses on the wards by up to 50%. So that is a technology that's already happening now. How do we expand that sort of model and that approach to actually get much more on the front foot? Then we get on to genomics. Uh, I would love to know how my genetic makeup links up with uh what I eat, uh, what I drink, how often I exercise, what my risk profile is. Um, and some people might find that scary. I recognize that. But equally, it could potentially be exceptionally powerful. We could probably say to a chunk of people, we don't need to do these things. We don't need to do these screening programs. And we could say to other people, we need to double down on these screening programs. We need to double down on this health support. So that is uh you know we've been talking about that for 20 years but it's starting to become a reality and then I think the final bit is how do we give much more empowerment to the user and to carers and to families because one of the great advantages of all of this data it's not just for improving the management of health care it's not just about supporting doctors it's actually about supporting individuals to understand a lot more about what's happening with them what should good care look like? Have they had good care? And then actually, has it made a difference? What impact has that care had on their on their life, on their quality of life as well as their life expectancy? So, I will stop at that point. I've covered lots of areas. I'm very happy to take some questions. &gt;&gt; You're on mute, Peter. &gt;&gt; Is there some reason the m the interaction of the mouse and the screen is slowed up by this platform. So, sorry. It took me a bit of time to get the thing across to click on it. Um, thank you so much Penny. Thank you. Lots of hands clapping for you there. As you can see, there are there are a bunch of questions which I'm I'm trying to kind of still as we go along. But but but what but certainly in amongst them and one I can ask you to to get started on is um you might disagree with this but but um my observation would be that we haven't seen any serious prioritization of the development of analytical cap capability. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And but also um the capability of those who use analysis to construct high quality decision- making processes that can draw on it. um what what do you think we could expect to see going forward that would change that? &gt;&gt; Yeah, so completely agree Peter. I mean, it's probably the thing that frustrates me the most in the NHS is, you know, that we are not um, as you say, prioritizing, investing, uh, actually we're not nurturing, growing, training, supporting people. Um, and I do find that frustrating. You know, we we already have lots of, you know, very bright, very capable people working in healthcare. We're very committed to it. Very, you know, it always staggers me how committed people are. we don't necessarily treat our staff particularly well, but people still turn up and are still enthusiastic and still want to make a difference. Um, and you know, for all the reasons I've said, sort of data uh analysis absolutely has to be at the core of that across all of these different areas. Um, and I think we we we've got to focus on that as well as wider management. Uh some of you may have read the Steve Black piece in the HSJ earlier this week was you know he's very good at getting straight to the point. We are desperately missing good operational management, good data management, good strategy to be blunt. Um and uh I would really like us I am chairing the steering group for the workforce plan and I would like us to go much bigger on that in the plan. So we it is it is being discussed uh it is there I think touched on it bit on the 10 year plan but I think we've got to make that much more substantive but it's not really just about numbers of people it's around the training and development of people that's the bit I worry about you know we we've got that I don't see those mechanisms really as fully in place as they need to be. Yeah, &gt;&gt; I mean we we've done work with um decision I live in Scotland actually so you can you can it's a different world but nevertheless we were doing some work with a system there and we were talking to leaders about where would you go to get this type of analysis in relation to this question um because they had quite a complicated system where for organizing their thing they were interested but what was the striking thing that came out of it was that in many of the instances the leaders we were talking to said I didn't realize that analysts could help me with that question &gt;&gt; and the sorts of questions I were ra we was we were raising them were things like if you've got multiple components in a system and you want to work out how to optimize the throughput who would you go to to help you with that analysis and they said I didn't analyst do that but what became clear is they'd never really talked to their analysts because in that system the way they asked for analytical support was they sent an email through to the analytical department saying, "Please give me this on Friday." They didn't even talk. So, &gt;&gt; welcome to the DHSC and NHS England. That's how it all works. So what can we do to to change the thinking of decision makers such that that they engage with analysts on h on problem formulation that they take a bit more time to understand what's possible analytically and then think about what do you need to do so we can access you know every hospital should have access to analysts who've got extensive operational research skills you know a whole set of methods designed to help operate these things and that isn't necess the case. What could what can we do to to to get the leaders to think differently? &gt;&gt; So I think we need to do I I would prioritize you know three things come out of that. So the first is we have to start which I am absolutely doing. So I'm I mean I mean to be blunt I am quite exhausted and this is the area that's giving me the most exhaustion because I'm going through every single area including the 10-year plan uh but also you know wider bits and I'm saying where's the data where's the analysis and then it turns up it's of not particularly well structured it's not very clear I then go through it I read literally all the pages and say no we need to look So um but I think it has to start at the top and it has to start at the top with me asking the boards of individual organizations which I am to see their data. So I myself and Jim and people in this room will know you know not necessarily perfect but I think it's pretty good is every trust in the country has been sent a data pack on um productivity opportunities. uh I don't think most people fully realize you know benchmarking typically to I think around the 70th percentile you know which means there's even more scope to go further but they've all got that deck and it all goes it all goes down in a lot of detail so I start by asking the the chair of every board in the country what are you doing and I say you know talk me through page 62 and what are you doing on that and invariably they haven't looked at it so but I think if I keep asking That's it. Jim keeps asking the cheapest tax. I'm hoping that that will start to So, you know, so there's a bit about that. We are absolutely &gt;&gt; that's the trouble. You'll have to you'll have to pick a different number each time. &gt;&gt; Well, you know what I mean. Yeah. But um &gt;&gt; but as we start doing the assessment processes for the new FTS or whatever we're going to call them, we'll go back to so I was on the board of monitor originally in 2004 and we we absolutely held those boards to account for their data and their analysis at all sorts of levels and they didn't know what we were going to ask. So uh you know they had to they had to come over as being data literate and understanding. I think one of the problems we've got is people aren't necessarily data literate. It's not a skill set that we necessarily recruit for or we test for. And that's true amongst some of our very senior executives and our very senior board meeting um uh non-executives. So, we've got to start by that. But what we've also got to do is provide the training and the development because I I think that is one of the other challenges is that sometimes the analysis isn't as good as it could be and therefore people switch off. You know, they don't get it. They don't understand it. It's not very well presented. It's not clear. It doesn't tell a story. And so, you know, therefore people don't look at it and don't ask for more of it. So, we need to really be saying this is important. We need to skill up uh senior exec. We need to skill up everyone senior. I don't think you should be able to be a chief exec unless you fully get you know data and analysis. You shouldn't be able to be a Ned either. And then we need to improve the quality of that data and analysis. Um another line of questioning um is around is is there more we could do nationally to to enable us to link data to just get away from this situation where in every local place it has to start from scratch and working through all of the we know there's somewhere in the country that has managed to share pretty much every type of data and yet we still allow IG to block it in other places. Can can we cut through that in some way? &gt;&gt; Doing my best. So, a paper came to the uh the board of HS England three weeks ago which was supposedly was called improving transparency of data and it was anything but that. So we rejected it and we said exactly what you've just said, Peter. Come back with a paper that cuts through all of this information governance and gets us to a plate. You know, we've got to respect obviously we've got to keep data secure. I'm not um minimizing that in the slightest, but you know, quite often we do have an awful lot of hoops that people have to go through, which um uh is is quite a barrier as people in this room will know to to actually improving quality of care, which is a shame. And I think one just as a final one as well. Um you know we we we we kind of introduce notions around whistleblowing and the opportunities for people to speak up when they see something that's wrong. Um we sometimes see analysis cited in favor of decisions or chances where a lot of people in the analyst community look at it and think that is methodologically forward. But there doesn't feel like a really safe and well doesn't feel like a welcomed point. You know, you're not exactly invited to part for suggesting to people like that. How how could we create an environment where it's where it's much safer and much more celebrated that skilled analysts point out challenges, difficulties in an and maybe weaknesses in analysis that maybe analysis that is supporting some of the most favored propositions of politicians and policy makers. How can we change that environment? &gt;&gt; Okay, so well you've asked this in the last minute, Peter, and in some ways I think this is one of the most difficult questions. Um and I think it is part I think probably it is quite a significant reason why we do struggle to move forward in healthcare. So because the gold standard in health care has come from medicine and research we tend to hold a strong statistical bar against analysis. And there are obviously lots of really really good reasons for doing that. And you know, I'm a statistics geek. You know, I think we've absolutely got to do that and we should do that in some areas. But if you are looking at things like operational performance, if you're looking at strategy, if you're looking at healthcare value and you're looking at costs, you're never going to have randomized control trial level statistical analysis. or if you are going to want that, it's going to take you an awful long time to do it and it's going to be quite complicated. And I think one of the things that we continually struggle with is that we often apply that same bar as if we were doing to a detailed RCT and a complex new drug to our operational improvement. And that is not what any other industry would do. So, you know, if Tesco decides to set up online shopping or to go with Tesco local, they don't have a, you know, statistically robust RCT that says this is the right way to go. You know, Apple wouldn't have that in developing a new product and so on and so forth. What they do do is that they try something. They try things far more frequently than we do and they test it and they say, "Does it work? What are the pros? What are the cons? What are the things we need to tweak?" And so on. So that's what we need to be doing and not saying actually this isn't fully statistically proven before we try something because we are trying things and in order to inform that we need to be looking at what they're doing in other countries what they're doing in other parts of this country where can we learn from things that people are doing and crucially that but I said we need to continually review and say how do we tweak things not throw them away they're not instantly miraculous but say how do we improve things and some things we will need to throw away but it's that sort of mindset. So I'm not fully convinced to be honest on this bit about saying come in and challenge if it isn't you know purest stats because I think that is what's held us back an awful lot and I think we've got to be a bit more honest that in quite a lot of this we do need good analysis to inform what we're doing but we shouldn't wait till we've got the perfect answer. Thanks very much, Penny. Thanks so much for your time. And as I said at the start, thank thank you for prioritizing coming to join us. It mate, it's it's it's been it's really important. Thank you very much for having me. Have a good day. &gt;&gt; Thanks, Peter. Bye.