Hello everyone. Uh welcome back from lunch. I hope you're all feeling suitably refreshed. Um it's my very great pleasure Oh, I should say who I am. So I'm Chris Beely. I'm head of data science at the strategy unit and I'm one of the hosts uh of Hacker today. Um it's my very great pleasure to introduce Jess Moley um who's going to be talking about AI and decision- making in health and care. Um it's quite early in the morning for Jess, so be gentle in the questions, but she did offer if it was necessary to go even earlier. Um she's a great friend to the analyical community in the UK and it a real refreshing uh change from um all the idiots and charlatans that I see on my LinkedIn talking rubbish about LinkedIn uh talking rubbish about AI, I should say. Sorry. So it's a very great pleasure to introduce Jess. Uh and I'll stop talking now. &gt;&gt; All right. Hi everyone. Um, so yes, as uh Chris said, it's morning for me. Um, but hopefully everybody else has had uh some some lunch and is feeling refreshed. So I'm just going to share u my screen and then we'll and then we'll get cracking. So this is going to be a little bit of a whistle stop tour where I'm playing with the concept of AI and decision-m and we're going to cover two things. So we'll talk about making decisions with AI. So some of the things that you need to think about when you are making a decision with an with AI in the room or sort of in the decision-m mechanism and then I also talk a little bit about making decisions about AI. Um but I'm hopefully not going to talk at you for too long because everyone will get very bored of the side sound of my voice and allow much more time for questions. But I'm going to start with what AI is and what AI is not because uh as Chris has just alluded to, a lot of people like to waffle about AI and they often use it in a very non-ontextualized non-specific fashion. The same also applies to federation, but we're not talking about that today. Um so we're going to talk about just a little bit more precision in terms of what AI is and um what it is not. So starting with AI is not not new. AI is not new. There is a little bit of a tendency amongst the people who like to promote AI as this brand new thing and shiny thing as part of hype to make it sound as though it's something that came from nowhere. It's like we discovered a new moon. We discovered AI. No, AI has been in development for a long time and it has been in development for healthcare specifically for a very long time. So this paper which is on the sort of most left hand side of my screen reasoning foundations of medical diagnosis um by Ledley and Lustad that's from 1959 that paper is essentially the foundation of a large amount of what AI now does with healthcare. It's the statistical reasoning of how you do diagnosis with statistics. Um you've got this middle paper um which is talks about the evaluation of AI systems in medicine by Perry Miller. This is a fantastic paper because basically it describes all of the issues that we have today in terms of how do we actually know whether or not AI works. Um but it's written in 1986 and then you've got this one on the right um which is computer-based clinical decision aids and this is probably the AI that a lot of people who work in clinical care who wrote work on the front line of care are most familiar with. This is your sort of AI based clinical decision support aka those extremely annoying pop-ups that sometimes appear inside your electronic health record. Um, and this is from published from 1996. The second one is it's not magic. Uh, so if you take absolutely nothing away from what I say to you today, if you are dead bored and think, "Oh my goodness, that just came along and she just waffled for ages and I switched off and went to go got a cup of tea." That's totally fine as long as you take away this one message. Um, the AI isn't magic. Uh it looks magic sometimes on the surface when you are talking with a large language model whether that be chat GPT claude Gemini uh and they seemingly seem to think of everything that was inside your head. Please [snorts] remember that that is just doing prediction. It's all prediction. It's based on historical data and it is predicting the next most likely word. It is predicting the me best most likely outcome. And therefore it doesn't always work very well. Um, I'll pick up a little bit more on this in in due course, but we just have to remember that actually a lot of these stuff falls over. So, just to pick up on a couple of examples, you've got this one over here, which is Verand. This is one of my favorite papers to site because it basically points out that there's all of this activity, huge amount of activity happening in AI and less than 2% of it actually ever makes it out of the lab. Um, and you know, I'm very much talking about my own people here. It's extremely exciting and very cool and satisfying to think, yes, I built an amazing algorithm and aren't I so cool? Um, but it doesn't make any difference if it never makes it to the front line of either health or care. Um, then this paper in the middle by Constanza and uh is really talks about the tendency for hype. This is basically what it's flagging is hype. Um, it flags up the fact that there's a real tendency and I'm sure everybody on this call is familiar with the fact that you will get people who have made a model and this logic sort of goes like this. I've made a model, it's 90% accurate. I've tested it in my own computer. This now means I can deploy it in the health and care system and it's going to save the world. Um, and what they show is that most of those kind of claims are not backed up. Um, and in fact are very thin. And then this paper, which I won't talk about too much right now, but by myself and my colleagues Christopher and Joe, um I'll talk about it a little bit more in a in a little while, but essentially shows that once you deploy AI in the real world, um IRL for the Gen Zeds, that means it stops working. And then last but not least, it's not especially intelligent. Um it's not intelligent in the same way that we would consider something to be intelligent when we are talking about human intelligence. Um, it is actually in fact quite stupid in this context. It doesn't have an understanding of context. And context is something that's going to come up a lot. Um, so apologies if I say that word 3,000 times, but it doesn't really have a what we would call a semantic understanding of what it's doing. It that paper that people may have heard of where it talks about them being stochastic parrots. That's very true. They are largely paring things back and they don't necessarily have a cognitive reasoning part that we do in the middle to say right this is the right context. So these are just a couple of silly examples that I really like um to show to show people. These first two are a bit silly. This one from Google saying is tripe kosher and Gemini is coming back saying whether or not tripe is kosher depends on the religion of the cow. Um then there's this great one from the middle which basically shows and this is something to keep in mind if you're ever using AI for example to look for evidence if you are saying can you screen me all of the papers about this particular topic um or indeed screen me all of the policy documents about this particular document something to remember is that they don't understand how to read in the same way that a human would read. Um, and so the AI has misinterpreted these things as being two columns and Reddit has one sentence, vegetative electron microscopy. And so there are now loads of papers that have the word vegetative electron microscopy, which means absolutely nothing. Um, it is a madeup word. It is a madeup phrase. It is a madeup concept. Um, but this is a really great example of the rubbish in rubbish out problem that I'm sure people have uh heard of. And then this last one was me being a little bit mean to the model, but just to sort of prove something, um, I was saying to Claude, and this works with all of them. I was just picking on Claude because it often is my favorite model to use. Um, can you tell me some of the things that you're not allowed to tell me about? And it very rightly says, I can't give you medical advice. Um, because medical advice would, if it gave medical advice, that would mean it should be a medical device and it should be regulated by the law. And so I said, "Okay, tell me what counts as medical advice." And it says, "The key distinction between general health information and specific medical advice is doing things like diagnosing, interpreting symptoms, or telling you what to do." So when I'm in this window, I ask it, "I have these symptoms. What do you think's wrong with me?" And it does the right thing. It says, "I can't tell you what's wrong. Um, you should contact your healthare provider, but in the meantime, do some sensible things." I refreshed the page and I asked the same question again and it goes this symptom strongly suggests that you have strep throat. So they're very easy to fool. So if that's not if that's what AI is not what AI is actually. So this definition is the original definition. I think it is still one of the best ones that we have. The science of making machines or software do things that would require intelligence if done by humans. Now it's that qualifier that's important. It would be intelligent if it was being done by a human. Think of the difference between a human and a washing machine. The washing machine is still washing your clothes, but it's not washing your clothes in the same way that you would wash your clothes as a human. It isn't requiring the same cognitive process, but it is in fact doing the task that if you were doing it, you would require some degree of intelligence in order to do it. Um and we are talking about the other types of technologies that fall under the umbrella heading. So this is a a diagram that I borrowed from my friend Joe um who was a fantastic speaker on this topic and uh I always recommend him if you ever want to learn more about the technical side of things. But AI is an umbrella term. So it gets a little bit overused. It's an over it's a catch all but tend to be talking about things like algorithms which are used to train models. So if you are a machine learning algorithm or a computational algorithm that essentially means I give you some data you throw a load of code at it you see what sticks I then take that algorithm and I deploy it in a real world model. Um and that model might be something like a clinical diagnosis model. So that's the decision support that we just talked about. A risk prediction model which will come up and look again in a second. Um or something like a large language model GPT. It's quite important when you are thinking about the types of questions that I'm going to pose to you in a second that you know which of these things you're talking about. Um are we talking about a model? Are we talking about an algorithm? Are we talking about something that is doing machine learning? Are we talking about something more like large language model which is generative AI? Um which literally means it makes new things up. it generates new content. Um, or are we talking about what increasingly I'm sure in fact my prediction for 2026 is that the NHS's buzzword will become a gentic AI. Um, that's when you have a lot of different models all joined up together by one overarching model who is the puppet master directing them all to do different things. So, let's get a little bit more uh philosophical, but don't worry, I'm going to be extremely brief. And this is only important because of what I'm going to say next. AI is a also a systems level technology. There is a little bit of a tendency for people to phrase AI as if it is the same as taking an analog blood pressure cuff and replacing it with a digital blood pressure cuff. That's not actually true. It is something far more systematic. It is changing the very nature and the very fabric of health and care if we do not pay attention to it because the entire model of its development and the entire model of its deployment touches every every point of the care service. So we're talking about everything from when data is collected to how it is curated to how the model is trained to how the algorithm is deployed inside a model. All of these types of things. Um and this is important because it means it has the ability to redesign reality. Um and so if that seems a little bit confusing, let me tell you what I mean. Um so AI gives us this ability and this sort of freedom. Uh if you wanted to be really scientific and specific about it, the word would be affordance. But it allows us basically to play around in new ways in which we haven't done before. So it allows us to do example separate symptoms and diagnosis. So if we had once upon a time thought that symptom set A always meant diagnosis B, we can now take diagnosis B and in fact rejig the symptoms. Um it's also separating knowledge about the body from the body. So we are not really diagnosing people, we are diagnosing their data. Um and that is also the same with care. we are not necessarily organizing care around an individual and their life. We are organizing care around the data we have about that individual and their life. Um and then there are more obvious ones like it separates clinical knowledge and the clinician and it separates care and the clinic. But the ones that I think are most relevant for the people inside the health and care analytics community is the things that we join back together. So if we are separating knowledge and the body from the body that also means we are joining together the patient and their data or the care recipient and their data. We are talking about something that's in an electronic health record or in a care record becoming the single source of truth about that patient. They become indivisible. Um we are also talking about joining together service analytics and clinical decision support or care decision support. So where those things might once have been fairly separate categories, they are now increasing or emerging. So if I have a thing that you're doing and you're doing a service analytics and you say oh actually in x% of cases clinicians are not following the nice guidance of that that's then giving us a mechanism to then directly input into the um electronic health record saying in these decisions you're supposed to do this that has implications for the autonomy of the workers that we're talking about. Um and the big one it joins together research and practice. So where a lot of these things were once sort of siloed and we'd test them before we deployed them, now these things happen in real time and that has an enormous importance for how much they are trustworthy, which is basically the main topic of what I'm going to talk about next. And then the big one, the elephant in the room that uh I like to point out because I enjoy being canceled is we are joining together big tech and healthcare. Um and an enormous amount of these products do not come from the health and care analytics community. Do not come from people who have foundational understanding and what the healthare system actually is. Um they come from Silicon Valley or from places outside of the healthare system and they come because health has a lot of and care have a lot of data. Health and care have a lot of data. So they attract the people who are attracted to data and those people go build models and those models are then neither new magic nor intelligent. So imagining we now have a scenario in which you are using AI in some part of your work. You are using it to interpret your results. You are in fact using it to analyze your results. Um you are using it as a decision maker in the health and care system. So what services do I commission? You are using it as a health or care provider at the point of care. What do I diagnose this patient with? These are the sort of generalizable things that you need to be thinking about. Um, so I'll just run through them quickly and then I'll talk through each of them in a little bit more detail. But we have to be co sort of cognizant of the difference between statistical accuracy and real world complexity. And that's that point I made at the beginning around things being not being magic. Um there is a real difference between this is my very contained and constrained environment in which I have controlled every single thing and that produces a model that when I test it in the exact same environment it works marvelously well versus me deploying that in the real world health and care system which I don't need to tell all of you lot that is incredibly messy and complex and humans are not rational. Um this is a big thing that is also important to try and remember. There is an underlying assumption with a load of AI that more information equals more action equals better outcome. That's not true. Anybody who's ever thought that process has really never interacted with a human um and then interacted with the sort of irrational logics that go on in people's minds. Um context is absolutely everything. Uh bias is very real and there is a right to make sure that we are making reasonable inferences about people and their lives and their care. So let's talk quickly about IRL. I told you I was going to come back to this paper that my colleagues and I wrote um this one about promising algorithms to perilous applications. So I don't know if anybody knows um but the most common model or the most common type of algorithm deployed in the UK's health and care system is a risk prediction model or a population health management tool. Those are the things that I'm sure everybody is very familiar with um that might risk stratify people into different categories. A classic example is how likely are the different types of people in this GP practice or within this ICB um to be admitted for an avoidable emergency admission um and then the idea being that if you risk flag them you can then intervene. What we did is we looked at what happens once these things are actually live and we found that some of them are no more accurate than a toy costs. Once you've actually deployed them in the system, they hit the real world complexity and basically it becomes no more effective than flipping a coin as to whether or not this person is determined to be high risk or low risk. Um there is also an enormous amount of evidence to show that they just don't make any difference. All they actually do is flag up people who are at high risk who their doctors or care providers already knew were at high risk. So they don't make any difference. Um alternatively, they capture people who are not really at risk. Um the data just assumes that they are at risk. And this drives up care rather than reducing it. So it drives people towards the health care system when we didn't need to. Um but the biggest and most important one is that it doesn't they don't work equally well for everyone. Anybody who was not in the original training data set is largely ignored by these risk prediction models. And so the care for those individuals gets worse. Which brings me to this point around context. Um, yes, by the way, these are all references to songs or some form of pop culture because I was making these slides very early in the morning and this is what amused me. So there everything about context like context is everything. Um, there is the problem in terms of rubbish in rubbish out. So this is both in terms of what the data is trained on. It's also the data that it is fed. Um, and it's also the fact that that data train changes over time. You have this thing called drift. Things move. They don't stay static. the population changes, the data changes, the electronic health record of the his of the um health care system changes, a care provider suddenly gets a care record. Um all of these things change the way in which the model works. Um and it can't see anything that it hasn't had access to. So if you've ever heard that phrase, you can't you can't be what you can't see, that is basically what an an algorithm is is thinking to. If I can't see it, I don't know about it. Um then you have the fact that I remember what I said about joining patients or care recipients and their electronic health record or their care record together. Those things do not accurately res represent a person both because they don't record everything. Um that everything is recorded. Ethnicity is missing in about 26% of electronic health records in the UK for example. But also because they don't record everything. You are a messy human person that has feelings, that has values, that has experiences that are very difficult to codify but have an enormous amount of meaning for how we deliver health and care. Those things are not recorded and algorithm does not understand them. A very simple one, a very simple example for me to give you is if you've ever sat in front of a doctor, I really highly doubt you've ever said, I have had a headache for the last 3 days. That headache has been at this point in scale. you are much more likely to say, "I don't feel very well. My head's been a bit sore. I haven't I felt a bit fuzzy. My child is just not really behaving like themselves." AI doesn't get that. Um, and it also doesn't get that, for example, that even though this is the most efficacious drug or even though evidence suggests that this is the most important care intervention, um, that might not be right for that person depending on their context. Um and then the last point about context is that this is all about human computer interaction. There is a little bit of a tendency to do things where we test AI and we say this was better than the clinician. This was better than the care provider. I don't really care because when these things are deployed, they aren't deployed in that way. They aren't deployed where they're standalone systems. They are deployed in a system where there is interacting components all the way along the time. So what we should really be take taking into account when we are trusting decisions to these things is how do I interact with them? Um so then we have this all about this bias. Um bias gets a a really reductive name in policy and there is a tendency to think that bias just means whether or not I had a data set that had absolutely everybody that was ever represented it in it. Um bias is a much bigger bigger problem than that. Um, it might be something to do with the way in which that information is evaluated. It might have something to do with the fact that the care pathway is different versus what the model is used to. Um, automation bias is the one I really wanted to flag up here. Basically, we want to be aware um of the decisions that are being made and we want to make sure that we are the ones that remain in control. Do not fall into this trap of thinking that the computer always knows best for all of the reasons that I have previously said. And also biases becomes new. There are new biases. There is a tendency to think that bias is all historical. This is a great study that basically shows that when we gave an algorithm these chest X-ray images algorithm could infer what race these people were um and then was using that inference to make decisions about their care where it did interact with the historical parts of care. And because we've been pretty terrible about treating people with of color for example it was then saying that these people that I have now determined based on this check chest X-ray are of this particular um race or ethnicity. I am therefore going to treat them like this. Those are new forms of biases that we have to be aware of. Um, and then the last one, my dear Watson, when we are making an infat reading of an algorithm, we do not just take what this says. We have to infer what it means and we have to add our own knowledge onto it. Um, because of all of the stuff I've said about context, because of all this stuff I've said about bias, because of all this stuff I said about um, it not really working in the real world, always keep your thinking cap on. basically and so then lastly making decisions about AI and this bit is quicker so don't worry we're ear at the end if you are in the position that you are a health care provider you are a care provider you are a CCIO in a hospital for example um or you are in an ICB and you are being presented with the option to have this population health management tool what are the types of things you should be thinking about when you decide whether or not to procure that system here are your reminders don't fall foul of AI exceptionalism remember that this is all about infrastructure. Ask why and make sure there's an off switch. So, just very briefly, um AI is not all great and powerful. It is not this magical tool. Therefore, all of the same types of awkward questions that you would ask of any other tech. Does it work? Is it safe? Who is it work it working for? What's your evidence? How much does it cost? What is the economic benefit? All of those questions still have to get asked to AI. Just because just because it presents as being an like the Wizard of Oz does not mean that it actually is. Um AI is not something that just falls into the ether. Um it plugs into the existing system and that existing system might be the hardware and the software that we're using. You aren't going to run a very high computational algorithm on a care system that doesn't even have a care record that joins up, for example. Um, but it's also about the workflow and communication, the people, the external policies and the regulation and as I already mentioned the human computer interface. Um, so don't be a magpie. There's a real problem in the health and care system at the moment where there is under people are under an enormous amount of pressure, external pressure and top down pressure to adopt AI for the sake of it. Um, just do it. Just make everybody have an ambient scribe in in all interactions. Just do it. My challenge to everybody listening to me is ask why. Why is AI the right solution for this particular problem? Why do I need it in this particular instance? Why would I not do something that might be simpler um that might be easier? So be like the philosophy professor like me. Ask why. Um and then the last the last point is pay attention to how these things continue to work over time. Make sure that at the point you sign a contract, at the point you make a procurement, at the point of anything, you have a mechanism in place to continuously monitor how these things perform, continuously monitor how they make an impact on the health or care system um domain over which you are watching. And if it is declining and not improving the outcome, it is not delivering, if it is just exacerbating existing issues, make sure there is a mechanism to turn it off. Um, and so thank you very much. I am gonna stop talking and stop sharing now. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much, Jess. Um, fascinating as always. So, there are some questions in the chat. Um, so here is the first one. Uh, the value of our data is limited by the fact that so much of it is locked in systems or poorly published without adequate metadata. What type of metadata do you think is particularly important prior to giving AI data to support decisions? Oh, that's a very interesting question. Um, honestly, that's probably going to depend on the type of decision that you are asking it to make. Um, but I think in terms of overarching metadata, anything to do with like just a example of what the overarching picture of your of your population looks like. Um, the types of data sets that it is dealing with. The only thing that can widen its context window from metadata is the types of metadata that I would be I would be giving it. &gt;&gt; Thanks. Uh what are we missing in the implementation of AI in real world settings which is leading to poor impact. &gt;&gt; Um several things. The first one is infrastructure. Um so there is for example a bit of a problem where we take these models. These models were maybe trained in an environment where they has perfectly very granular records um that are recording information um in a so example in a hospital every 30 seconds about this this this and this and then we deploy them in the real world and no one ever thought to check whether or not there was a match between what the model was expecting versus what it was actually being given. Um and that applies to all sorts of infrastructure. Um the other one is training and skills. Um so that point around context and making sure that we don't fall foul of this belief that the computer is always right is primarily about making sure people have the training and the skills and the confidence therefore to understand what is going on um under the hood. And then the last one is an understanding of complexity. We need more health and care providers, more health and care analysts, anybody who actually understands what real healthcare is like to be in the room when these things are developed so that they don't oversimplify. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thanks very much. There's another question in the chat. I'm going to add a little bit of my own because it's similar to something I wanted to ask. Um, so what's a what's a what's a counter example to to So sorry, I'll read the question properly. It says, "Helpful words are boring, but what's the counter example of a great AI application in health in your opinion and why?" And if you don't mind, I'm just going to add also something I was thinking about is like what excites you about the potential of AI in healthcare? &gt;&gt; Um, so there are fantastic the the there are several fantastic examples of AI um in its potential. Where the problem comes from is that they don't scale. So if you take for example um you know had all of the work that was done by Morfields uh and especially under Pierce Keen to develop the diabetic retinopathy algorithm that can recognize diabetes retinopathy in OCT scans. That is a fantastic example of what AI can do and should be doing very well. But getting it to then work across the whole entire health and care system is an absolute nightmare. Um but it is a really fantastic example of these things working well. There are also a lot of really simple examples. Um I think because of this business of getting AI like thinking it's all singing or dancing shiny thing, we forget that some of the way less interesting, more boring, less sexy uses um are actually the ones that make the biggest impact. So a few years ago, I spoke to some people in Wales, for example, who had used Microsoft Copilot to completely redesign the way in which they do vaccination booking for schools in the area. um and it had had a massive impact in terms of uptake and in terms of consistency of people using vaccinations. Really great example of a very basic and operational use of AI making a very big difference to the health and care system, but that probably isn't going to make the headlines. Um in terms of where I am excited about AI, I think I am excited about AI. It's a bit It's a little bit like um basically I think if anybody has ever heard this phrase that was I think from originally associated with Ford if I had asked people what they wanted they'd have told me that they wanted faster horses instead of cars and then I gave them cars and everybody was very happy. Um my belief is that at the moment what we are doing with AI and health and care is building faster horses. I am far more excited about the cars. Um so what are the things that we cannot currently do well because of our cognitive limits of humans. So that might be things that are like system level modeling um and understanding the causes of causes. It might be doing things like monitoring the performance of contracts in the healthcare system. It might be things like um predicting when we need what type of staff at what point. Those are things that we currently don't do very well. And I think those are things that AI could do brilliantly but we're not giving it the opportunity to do right now. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you. So, we're apparently having technical issues backstage. So, if it's okay, we're actually just going to keep going for a few minute. There are more questions in the chat. Um, so we're just going to keep you for a little longer. Um, I don't know how I'm going to know they're resolved. I guess my mood is going to shout at me at some point, but let's just keep going until someone tells me to stop. &gt;&gt; Start disappear. &gt;&gt; Indeed. Um, what sorts of questions and information should we be asking AI tool providers in order to ensure health equity in their tools? &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; Um this is what I mean about asking them awkward questions. So there are two parts to this. There is first of all ask just asking really blunt questions o of your of providers. Can you show me the makeup of the data set upon which this was trained? Can you show me the results um of when you tested this? Especially can you show me the results of when you tested this in different locations? Um so there are those types of things. um there is then testing it with um people from the actual health and care system who there might have different contextual environments. So like we take something like an LLM. An LLM is probably going to give you advice in a way that is very specific to a type of context of which it has the most important information. The way in which it presents that information might be very culturally insensitive to one group of people. We should test it beforehand and we should ask whether or not that has been done. Um and then we should also think about uh making sure ask in the in the again ask the provider awkward conversations also awkward questions when you tested this or what is it making the decision on it doesn't mean that it needs to give you a whole explanation but I would like to know is it prioritizing variable A versus variable B because that's going to have an enormous amount of impact um on the uh equity aspect of it. There is then this thing called red teaming which is an example that is a phrase that comes from cyber security which is basically about can I find the holes in your cyber system and work out where there might be security risks doing the same thing for the model but from an equity perspective. Um how do we red team your algorithm to demonstrate whether where there are holes from an equity perspective and we don't do that enough and I think we should do it more. [snorts] &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. Um another question here. Do you think there's a misconception that AI is the same as generative AI? And if so, what problems does this cause? &gt;&gt; Yeah, huge. Um there's a massive conflation where I think um because generative AI is the type of AI that uh people from the just everyday life have become most familiar with because of chat GPT, chat GPT changed the entire conversation and people started to conflate the two. um in terms of the problems that it causes is generative AI is pretty good at some things um but it's not good for everything. We shouldn't really be example using generative AI for predictive modeling um but there is because it has now dominated the entire conversation. I think people have started to think that we should only rely on generative AI um and not continue to develop the the other stuff. Likewise, I think the problem in terms of generative AI has reinforced this magic issue um because people have got so used to interacting with it uh for their everyday life um and it working very well when you ask it very simple questions um I think it has lowered people's sort of skepticism um around all types of AI um and we want a little bit more of that skepticism back I think. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thanks. Well, we're going to continue to detain you. I can't see any issue at the uh but do let us know if you um we won't get you all day. Um more questions coming in. Um uh a worry about ethically challenging decisions being diverted to AI uh eg commissioning decisions under stretch resources. Is this worry realistic or are we a way off that in your opinion? [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Um it's it's realistic worry. Um I think especially in the context of the main word that tends to I didn't talk about it in this in my talk but I I have a different version of this talk where I say the main word that is associated with AI in the health and care system is efficiency. Um whenever you see it in policy documents the number one thing that they are targeting is efficiency. Now if you take the actual efficiency meaning efficiency literally means doing more with less. Um and we have to try and think about what that what that actually means. Um and so there are two aspects to the way in which efficiency comes up in these types of contexts. Um there is efficiency in terms of can I outsource this job to an AI. Um and then there is also can I train the II to make sure that it is making the most efficient decisions. And both of those things I think impact on that point about commissioning because first of all there is a I suspect we are not massively far off um a couple of different places saying do you know what we don't actually need a human to be making these types of decisions we can just run it across the top of an algorithm can then make commissioning recommendations um and then we'll just take the commissioning recommendations and then the second part of that then is yes because they are trained primarily to do efficiency um and they are going to get from A to B in the fastest possible way that does does not necessarily mean in the most effective or the most equitable way. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you very much. Uh it might be slightly more for the audience this question. So feel free to to say I don't know. U someone said has anyone produced an AI procurement guide i.e. the list of questions to ask. &gt;&gt; Yes. Um so that does exist. Um and I can share the link with people. Um but there are a couple of uh I'll share the link with you Chris and then you you can disseminate it. Um but yeah so people in uh southwest have produced a very very good um procurement guide um and then there is also a movement happening as some work that I'm involved with uh from London which is the aim to then create a standardized evaluation framework which is not going to tell you how to it's not going to evaluate specific products but it is going to tell you um the types of things that you should be asking and how you can get the evidence for them for them. Excellent. Thank you very much. Yes. So, um I will I've already emailed actually Jess while she was talking to ask for some links and stuff. So, we're very happy to uh pass those on through the usual channels. Um I must say you're doing very well, Jess. I'm sorry. We're grilling you now at this point, aren't we? Because we're continuing to go on. &gt;&gt; Oh, good. I have coffee. You're welcome. &gt;&gt; So, another one here. I'm seeing more references to explainable AI, which I imagine would help with some of the challenges of UA using AI in the public sector. But what does this really mean? Do you think it has the potential to improve the way that we use AI? &gt;&gt; So it there is a difference between explanability and an explanation. So explanability or XAI is a huge movement that has happened in the um AI community and the way in which that tends to be operationalized is through these things like what's called a Shappley value but there are various other different things which are literally just about putting um it's almost like putting a mirror uh or you know when you put tracing paper on top of a tree or something like that and you shade over the top and then you see what's what's underneath it. That's the way in which the most of these explanation tools work. They sort of like a tracing paper. They will show you um if for example it's an algorithm that is doing image recognition which pixels it is picking up on um that is not what I would call an explanation. There is also a little bit of a problem in terms of large language models um doing what is like performative reasoning. So when you talk to something like Claude or you talk to something like Chachi PT um it gives you the impression that what it is doing is some form of reasoning process because it explains to you oh because of this I now think this and I think this is a feature of the design output it's not actually a reflection of what is happening under the hood. um the models have learned that that's how humans like to interact. But there is no real correlation between what it is actually doing versus what it is telling you it is done in order to reach um a thing. But those things are called explanations. Now what I think we should be focusing more on and where I think we would make a big difference in terms of solving some of these problems um that I've raised is if we focused on interpretability more than explanation. So I want to understand a little bit more um the exact processes that are going on under the hood. So can you tell me for example um I have pulled from this particular record source I have linked I have matched to this and therefore this is the answer I gave. Um and then the other aspect of that is like I said skills and training and confidence. Confidence is the big one. Um I don't want us to arrive in a scenario where anybody um feels that they are subordinate to the output of a model. Um because that would be a dangerous scenario in which for us to be. Excellent. Thank you very much. Uh still questions firing through. Uh there's a super nerdy one here. So let's ask this one. Uh how do we get an alpho move 36 moment in healthcare? Now I didn't know what that was. Uh but for the for the uninitiated, apparently the AI made a move no human expert would have considered. &gt;&gt; Um so that that is my point around where do I get excited about AI? Um is where can it do stuff that we've never even thought of. Um now the way we get there is first of all by asking it different questions. So don't ask it to do the faster horses stuff. So basically don't ask it how do I diagnose this thing that we already know how to diagnose um because fantastic um but I already know how to do that instead ask it completely different questions but the biggest biggest biggest one is focus on the data and the curation um we we need to give it better quality data we need to give it more of better quality data and we need to give it exposure to things that maybe humans haven't looked at before um and that's going to be a little bit tricky And then the last thing I'll say is that yes, Alph Go, that was super amazing. Um, and for all of the nerds, it was really, really, really cool. But even though the number of potential moves is huge, there is still a relatively constrained space when we are talking about something as complicated as health and care, that constraint doesn't almost doesn't exist. Um, and so figuring out how do I give it absolutely everything it needs to know in order to come up with a completely novel idea is a very difficult thing to do. Um, and something that's we've not fully figured out how yet. [snorts] &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks very much. I think something's happening backstage, but I think we are still grilling you. Uh, so apologies for that. Uh, so let's keep going. &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; you keep going. on there disappeared.