Next um talk is from Sarah Lundelle from the Salganska University Hospital in Sweden um and Zela King from University College London and their talk is titled Enhancing Patient Flow Realtime Prediction at a Swedish emergency department. Uh so welcome to the stage Sarah and Zella. &gt;&gt; Thank you Sarah. Um okay great. Uh so yes hi um my name is Sarah Lindell as cla mentioned and I am a data scientist from the AI competence center at Sanska University Hospital here in Goththingberg Sweden and today I'll share our collaboration with the clinical operational research unit uh CORU for short at University College London and together we've been working on enhancing patient flow in the emergency department using real time prediction and I also want to mention this is a project funded by the Swedish innovation agency. So this project began when two clinicians from the emergency department at our hospital asked my team uh could artificial intelligence possibly help us manage unplanned emergency patient visits. Uh so the emergency department at Saganska uh faces daily challenges securing beds for impatients as many wards are already operating at or near uh capacity. So we realized the key was predicting impatient inflow uh which for the last years has accounted for roughly 20% of patient visits uh to the emergency department at our hospital. And building on that insight, we asked ourselves uh what if we could also predict where patients needed to be admitted to. Uh cuz this would provide a clearer uh datadriven view of the pressure on the emergency department, making the problem more tangible in numbers. uh and in turn it could strengthen shared understanding and enable more proactive public collaboration with the wards. So we began our external monitoring and came across an article by Salah King has joined me here today and her colleagues uh which was on predicting hospital admission for emergency patients and Salah presented this work as hacker 2023 actually. Uh so intrigued by their approach we reached out and arranged a meeting to learn more and that is when Zela shared that the research had led to an opensource Python package. So we saw an opportunity to apply it in our context at Solenska and that marked the beginning of our collaboration. As so we set the wheels in motion on a project to assess whether the tool could work with our data and uh evaluate it uh the performance uh in our setting. Uh so the collaboration began when Koru visited us at Saleska in November last year and as part of uh this project we have had two extended trips that has uh given us a great opportunity to work handson uh together and the first trip took place in February uh lasting about a month and then there was a second trip in May June uh lasting approximately 2 weeks. And in between and afterwards we have continued to collaborately collaborate remotely. Uh so you could say that the work has been organized around two main phases. Um the first phase of the project was all about cleaning and preparing real-time data from our Elvis system for the pipeline and getting to grips with the emergency department's processes was crucial for interpreting the data accurately. And the second phase we applied the same approach uh at Cella done at University College London Hospital uh using the Python package to train our own predictive models. And finally we used the the built-in tools in the package to assess uh the performance in our setting. So now we can produce our own predictions for bed demand for patient inflow through the emergency department. Um much like at uh University College Lana Hospital. Um so over to some lessons and insights. Uh one of the biggest insights uh was that despite having using different input variables and achieving what seemed like less no sorry uh having different input variables and having what seemed like less detailed data. We achieved predictions uh comparable to uh Koru uh using the same setup. And this slide shows the different groups of variables used at each hospital setting. And as mentioned uh earlier, we thought that our data at Solanska uh was less detailed. And some of these groups you can see uh contain uh only a handful of variables compared to uh what Coror used. Um so one of the biggest challenges uh was uh recreating unfinished visits uh with the completed data that we had uh to simulate a real-time scenario uh for the models to train on. Uh we needed data that remained static throughout the patient's visits or where updates did occur that those updates also were retained. And uh what we did discover was that some data hadn't been stored in this way and in some cases certain data points weren't saved at all uh possibly because they weren't considered relevant at the moment and not worth retaining for future use uh or only relevant for the moment. Sorry. Um so unfortunately this made it impossible to use some of the data that we uh intended to in the beginning. So continuing on this comparison uh for similar models across the different settings uh at solian scan UCL uh these shap plots uh illustrates which features had the greatest influence on the model's predictions and as expected age ranked highly in both settings. But beyond that the feature importance varies between the two contexts. Our main takeaway was that understanding process differences really shaped our approach. Whilst our hospitals share many similarities and face comparable challenges, we uncovered notable differences in uh how we we operate today. Um for example, we observed variations in patient management across the emergency departments. Um and one element of the package didn't fully align with what sol practices were which led to uh different care pathways and waiting times. Uh but due to the close nature of our collaboration uh we were able to provide uh direct feedback. Uh so in response, Cella introduced an alternative solution making the package more flexible and broadly applicable uh across sites and uh we think this uh adjustment was a significant outcome since it helped generalize the solution uh for wider use. So that is just one example of the impact this project has had and here are a few more examples. After completing the project, we tested the predictions with an ED clinician over two days. And this trial sparked interest in running a longer pilot which we are now uh exploring. And uh in November this year, Cory returned for a visit uh which was a highlight for us. And uh together uh we presented the project at several uh Swedish hospitals uh across the country. Um, so that was all for me. Um, Stella, did you want to add anything that I might have missed? Oh, yeah. Thanks, Sarah. That's No, that was perfect. Just to reiterate, um, I think Sarah said that the uh, process of working together enabled some improvements to the package. Um, which was so true because it made I had to really think what I'd I'd implemented that was very specific to the NHS or to UCL and then what uh was actually very generalizable. And the and the amazing thing was to discover that despite Sarrenka having very different data flowing in real time, we were still able to get models that performed well to predict any given patients of any given patients probability of admission and then aggregate that to predictions for each of the specialties that SARS showed. So it was just really cool to be able to see this implemented on another site and to see also that this could transfer internationally. So yeah, it's been a really exciting project. Very happy. And just also to reiterate that I think you saw sorry you saw my hacker talk from 2023 because it was available and you contacted me after that. So this is, you know, massive credit to to Hacker for um for inspiring this collaboration. &gt;&gt; Definitely. &gt;&gt; Well, thank you then. &gt;&gt; Wow. Thank you both so much. That was um a really beautiful story of of working together, collaborating um and how kind of a good working relationship has helped you kind of generalize that model and made it made it work in another setting really well. Um so that was really nice to hear. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; Um please do post questions um in the Q&amp;A if you have any uh for Zella and Sara. But I will um I'll just start by if I may just it's pro probably more of a a comment really but obviously in the NHS we're we're very focused on our own problems and looking inwards and you know diagnosing um what our problems are and and trying to troubleshoot. So it's really nice to see this international um example. So perhaps this is is to Zella kind of what do you feel that the value is of of doing this international project? Well, so one of the things that really was striking for us was how many of the problems as Sarah said were were very similar in terms of capacity problems um in terms of that causing overcrowding um and so to see I think we we maybe idealized Scandinavia in this country sometimes but to understand that actually this is a a problem for for for many developed economies um and you know the pressures on healthcare services were were really similar. Um so it was just really useful to to understand that but also to see that a solution that we've created in the NHS uh with really with the NHS um issues and pressures in mind could apply could could be extended elsewhere. We we did have to make some modifications as Sarah said um part of it was to do with like making sure the package could accommodate different data types. Um, and then public was also thinking, you know, we have a very explicit 4-hour target in this in the in England for ED admissions and we that wasn't necessarily appropriate. So, sort of finding other ways to represent demand in terms of um how long it would take people to be processed through the ED. That that was another really useful aspect of working with her and her colleagues. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you. Um, and I guess where where next with this with this piece of work? &gt;&gt; Uh, do you want to say just a bit about the deployment questions you now have? And Sarah and then I'll &gt;&gt; we have at our um as I mentioned, yeah, we're assessing if we could do a pilot um in our uh yeah, in the ED. So, we're excited about that. Um but I think it will be if you want to say something about your extended works a lot. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So just on the deployment thing I think the the the project uh for S grand school is very much like can we replicate this and here's a proof of concept. So we've managed to get something deployed at UCL. So now some of the conversations are amongst your colleagues sort of how this application might be deployed such that you could have a full-scale pilot um really put this in front of users to see how they how they like it and what they would want differently from it. Um from our side um SAR just organized an amazing week in Sweden where we visited um Sensar and Gothberg but also three other hospitals in in Stockholm and Lund and uh Hamstad. Uh and it was just great to be able to go together and talk about where the work began and then talk about the fact that another hospital has implemented it. Um because we could we could start to sort of build a story about this the the generalizability of what we've done here. Um so yeah, it's kind of exciting. We're looking forward to what happens next. &gt;&gt; Yeah, brilliant. We'll be um I'm sure we'll all be eagerly um keeping our ears and eyes peeled to see what happens next with implementation. Um thank you so much. Um we'll wrap up. Oh, sorry. I think we might have had a question drop in. I'll I'll just ask that one. Um so from Jack um what did you each learn about the others health service that you would see as learning for your home country? I think it was what Cella mentioned that there are a lot of similarities. So I think we can work together and do more of these kinds of projects and I thought that was really &gt;&gt; yeah thankful. &gt;&gt; Yeah exactly. Um the sort of the this the challenges are similar but some of the solutions can as well. There are a couple of um questions in the in the chat actually in the attendee chat. Um shall have we got time just to answer those? &gt;&gt; Yes, I didn't spot those. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Do you want to read them out and then &gt;&gt; I I will do my duty. So what's been the interest interest from management in this? Has it been difficult to push through or has it had a lot of backing? &gt;&gt; Would you like to answer that first from your side? from my side. Um the project in itself I think was um perceived as a very like very most people were very excited due to that it was we were able to try a solution that had been implemented and uh that there was a lot of effort behind. So in that sense for our team we got uh positive feedback doing this project and starting it. Um and now we'll see with the pilots where it will end up I would say. Um yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. And it feels like we we were there last week, it felt like we had a conversation with someone quite senior who was interested in in in your hospital who was sort of just interested to understand it as part of a someone involved in a change program where where you know that the how the EDS are organized might change. Um it was really nice to see that you've you've captured the attention of ED clinicians, web managers, senior senior individuals and also technical people. So it's been very cool to see it kind of spreading through so through your through your efforts. Um uh and I think in UCLH a lot a lot of our success is due to the support with of people like Allison Clemens who I presented at Hacker 2024 with uh who is the director of operations uh at at the coordination center in in UCL and just really really they've stayed very loyal to the application that we've developed and and continue to use it. Um &gt;&gt; yeah, &gt;&gt; thank you. One um final question from uh from Peter asking how do we well have any other NHS teams, organizations done the same? I think we've talked about that in terms of kind of where implementation and rollout is going next. But an important question on how do we generate more sharing and more adopting behaviors. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So on the first thing about other NHS teams, uh so at the RP Python conference a couple of weeks ago, I did uh have conversation with a couple of other hospitals who who may be able to adopt something. Um so yeah, watch this space on that one. Um so that's really exciting to think that we might be able to spread this inside the NHS a bit. Um I think in terms of how we encourage more sharing obviously I don't need to say this this community open source and and you know reproducible pipelines a massive help and it would have been really different if we hadn't gone down that route in terms of working with um so yeah big plus for for rap uh and I think just talking um talking about what we're doing and trying I'm aware that this is not an easy uh aspect of of using real-time data for for predictions is is tricky to get the data ready to to do it. So you the more I can share and others can share about how to do that I think is through platforms like this the better. &gt;&gt; Wow. Thank you. On that note um we'll wrap up. Um thank you again so much. And