talk today. I think we're all ready. Uh we have James Edom and Euan Evans from the Department of Health and Social Care and their talk is titled modeling characteristics associated with the risk of a poor patient outcome 90 days after discharge. Um so please welcome James and Euan. &gt;&gt; Thanks CLA. Um, hopefully you can see the screen. Okay. Um, well, I won't do too much of introduction cuz Cla did a good one. Um, is the slides moving? &gt;&gt; Yeah, we can see those. &gt;&gt; Cool. So the research question as CLA's already mentioned me and James um were trying to answer was could we understand uh which characteristics are most associated with poor discharge outcomes. Um so in order to answer this question we needed to come up with an objective definition of what a poor outcome actually is. um it's not a perfect uh perfect definition but it's sort of the best we could do and gave us a criteria in which to perform our our data linkage and so on. So we came up we we decided on if a patient is readmitted to hospital emergency admissions only um starts a new long-term residential service in adult social care or dies within 90 days of discharge. Um the reason one of another reason why we chose this is because it aligns with uh another uh statistic that our department produces called uh ASCOF 2D um the adult social care framework uh statistics. Um so the data sets that we used for our analysis were client level data. So it's a um activity uh sorry an events level data set um many of you are probably familiar with but we used the dduplicated extract of users of adult social care system from January 23 to March 25. We also used uh HEZ um which I'm sure again many of you will be familiar with. Um we used a cleaned extract of HEZ derived from monthly SUS um passed through the four acceptance criteria identical uh to those used for the discharge ready date monthly publication produced by NHSSE. Um and we sample 2024 discharges only. Um we also use the ONS data ONS death data set from September 23 to March 25. Um so in terms of the features we considered for our analysis uh we've got all these here on the left. So uh we've got age, ethnicity, gender, trust, region of trust, uh local authority of residence, primary diagnosis, chapter, presence or absence of mental health condition, admission method, discharge location, pre-dr length of stay, length of delay, frailty, deprivation, pre-mission other care, and pre-mission care home. uh for those uh bottom two that was uh if they had uh instances of those services in the 365 days prior to admission. So um the data set that we constructed after we had sort of pre-processed all our features um was a a supervised learning sort of uh problem that we had. We had um each row in our data set was an individual discharge. Um and we had assigned every discharge either a poor or a successful outcome. Um and so because we had um we also obviously then we trained our model and we had um predicted poor outcomes as well um on our on our test set. Um so we could look at the proportion of uh actual and predicted poor outcomes at different geography levels. So here we've plotted on the left the um actual represented by the bars and the dots representing the predicted port outcomes uh in different trusts. So if we take maybe this trust over this this dot over here. So here perhaps in this trust we had particular a particularly old and frail population going into that trust which is why we would have predicted a uh a high proportion of poor outcomes. But you can see that the bar is actually much lower. So for whatever reason um perhaps something's going on in that particular trust which means that they're performing better than we would expect and we're actually seeing a lower proportion of actual poor outcomes. Um and obviously the converse is true uh for this dot down here. for that particular trust. Um and we did remove some trusts uh which had too few uh discharges. So here oh uh our model was able to predict 64% of discharge outcomes correctly. Pardon me. Um with uh pre-mission and other care pre-mission other care and patient age the strongest determinance of discharge outcome. Um so you can see here we've plotted plotted on the right the relative a relative feature importance plot uh with all features scaled against the pre-mission other care uh coefficient. Um and we were also interested me and James uh at the time worked in the uh discharge analytical team. So we were interested in the uh length of hospital delay um because uh there's a lot of uh quant quantitive and qualitative sort of analysis that suggest this uh a long length of delay can lead to deconditioning for patients. Um and on the left we've got plotted here um the both the feature size and direction. Um so you can see here the features in red an increase in these features are associated with an increase in the likelihood of a poor outcome. Um and those features in blue those are associated uh an increase in those features was associated with a reduction in the likelihood of a poor outcome. So um the headline sort of figure from our analysis or one of one of them was uh the hospital discharge delays are associated with an additional 1,200 deaths per year. So how did we get to this figure? So once we trained our model, we had a model with a set of coefficients. um we could pass in um a new unseen patient with particular characteristics and we would the model would spit out a um predicted um likelihood of a poor outcome for that given patient. So what we did is we passed in uh the mean patient in our test data set um aged roughly sort of 72 um these sorts of things and we also passed in a length of delay of 1.32 days which is the uh which was the actual observed length of discharge delay for over 65s uh in England uh in 2024. Um uh I think that's excluding um zero day uh stays. Um we then passed in the mean patient again but we did so with a zero day delay and we looked at the change we observed in the proport likelihood of a poor outcome and that change was 0.2 percentage points. Uh so uh yeah so as we move from uh go from 1.3 down to zero we observed a reduction in the likelihood of a poor outcome uh by 0.2%. into percentage points. We then applied that percentage point uh change to the observed number of events that we saw in 2024. Uh so there were 2.3 roughly discharges of over 65s. So sorry 2.3 million discharges of over 65s. um and we applied that percentage point increase to the number of um observed uh different different out different possible events uh that contribute to that poor outcome. Uh so we saw we can attribute the redu that 1.3 days to uh 1,200 uh deaths uh 3,300 additional readmissions and 300 additional new long-term residential services. Um me and James are no longer part of the analytical team as um as I mentioned but um we did consider some next steps for our analysis. Um and the things that we were considering was training the model on different cohorts of patients. So at the moment we were just training our model on a over sampled uh we did over sample over 65s. Um but we could try um training the model on a different um cohort maybe split by region or diagnosis codes. Um the way we trained our logistic regression model, we weighted uh deaths, readmissions, and new long-term services equally. Um but we could potentially weight them differently um and and try try that approach. Um and then finally, which features are associated with higher cost to government of caring for a patient in the year following a discharge? uh given that we know the cost of a a stay in uh hospital bed and we know the cost of um staying in a residential or nursing care uh care home. Um and that's all our slides. Um so thank you for listening. You have any questions me and James will try to answer. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much both for that. That was a really interesting presentation. We have had quite a few questions coming in so I will pull um some up. So um Fabian says very interesting work. Is this a regression model and did you look at more fine grain performance metrics like true positive and true negative rates? &gt;&gt; Uh yes. So it's a it was a logistic regression model. Um and we uh so it's a binary classification task. Um, and we did look at uh, yeah, precision and uh, and recall as well. We had like got that confusion matrix out. Um, and I don't think we have it in the annex actually. Um, can't remember the exact numbers. Um, but yes, &gt;&gt; we won't hold you to the exact numbers now, don't worry. Is this is this available to uh, the report available for people to look at if they'd like to? Uh yeah, we can we can certainly find find uh uh precision we we did a precision recall um plot as well. So we can find that we can add it to annex as well if people &gt;&gt; okay slides. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Uh one more question from uh Steven Wyatt. So he says I know about the client level data set but haven't had an opportunity uh to work with it yet. What was it like to work with? Any perspective on its coverage and quality? Any tips or advice on using it? Um James, do you want to do you want to go on that one? &gt;&gt; Yeah, so it's is a relatively new data collection, so there are certainly some completeness issues with it. Um long-term care seems to be reasonably well populated. Um but short-term care uh isn't as good. Um local authorities know that and they are trying to improve it. Um but possibly as you'd expect, something that's been around um a service that's been going for a long time is likely to have been put in there at some point, whereas somebody who has 2 days of social care that might not be in there. Um so definitely the the long-term care um is much higher quality and coverage. &gt;&gt; Great. Thank you. Um we'll squeeze in one more question. We're going to a break. Um I think this hopefully should be easy to answer. How did you define frailty? I think I saw that on one of your slides. &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Um yeah. So frailty um as you see on the top right there, we used the methodology from Gilbert atal. Um so we essentially assigned a score based to every primary diagnosis code. Um, and then one of the columns in the hairs is like a a primary diagnosis code like concatenated and it has every every uh diagnosis code that someone when in a spell in hospital they can obviously be um diagnosed with multiple conditions. So you might have as many as like five or 10 uh primary diagnosis codes in a single um single row and then each individual um diagnosis code is associated with a a score um like contributing to that frailty. Um and we'd simply just sum uh yeah sum those up at discharge level. Um