Right. Hello everyone. Hope hopefully you're uh refreshed after that short break and ready to go for the uh final session of Hacker 2025. Uh we're going to get straight into the next presentations. Uh just a quick reminder to keep using that Q&amp;A box to submit your questions for the speakers as we go through. We've got uh four uh short presentations for you today. Uh, and first up we've got Katie Brown from Arthritis UK, uh, who's going to be talking to us about the Arthritis Lift Experience Survey. So, straight over to you, Katie. Oh, I spoke too soon. We're just getting the slides up. I think if you can just go into presentation mode, Katie. &gt;&gt; Oh, we're not in presentation mode. Is that working? &gt;&gt; Yep. Off you go. Perfect. Thank you so much. Sorry about that. Um, hi everyone. My name is Katie. Um, and I'm a senior insight analyst at Arthritis UK and we are the UK's leading arthritis charity. Um, and I'm here to talk to you today today about our large scale study of the lived experience of people living with arthritis across all four nations of the UK. Um, which we published back in October. It's a really large report with lots of data in it. So, this presentation is just going to run through some of the key findings, some of the stories that we were told and then also some policy recommendations that we included at the end of our report. So we just look at an overview. So first of all, why why do we do the survey? Uh because over 10 million adults, young people and children in the UK are living with a form of arthritis. A condition which is one of the leading forms of disability in the UK and can affect anyone. Uh for those who less familiar, a really quick definition of arthritis, um it refers to painful, stiff or restricted joints. And these symptoms are common in conditions that cause joint damage or inflammation. The purpose of the survey was to gather quantitative data through a UK-wide representative survey to give a broad overview of the lived experience of those living with one or more arthritis conditions. So we worked with you and commissioned it through their panel and we also supplemented with recruitment from our own networks. This was primarily through social media. We ended up with 7,928 adults. So those over age the age of 18 living in the United Kingdom and we surveyed those with a formal diagnosis and those without a formal diagnosis too. To these respondents, we applied waiting based on the population prevalence of conditions um age, sex and ethnicity distributions. And we also really tried hard to kind of over sample from people we hear from less frequently. Uh so those from Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland, uh those with kind of conditions we hear less about, so gout for example, and then also from younger people just to increase the robustness of the sample. And the survey covered a wide range of topics that affect people's arthritis, including diagnosis, treatment and care, work and finances, and the management of conditions. And just to say that we had a steering group um that worked with us on the project that provided guidance throughout and that the report and the results were reviewed by clinicians from lots of different backgrounds. So, as I say, it's a really hefty report and I'll pop a link to the report in the chat um at the end of the presentation. Um, but I'm just going to run you through kind of the key findings from the five chapters and our policy recommendations. So, chapter one is the impact of arthritis. Um, and it covers the broad impact that arthritis has on people's lives. We found that arthritis is significantly and negatively impacting people's lives across all questions covering things like diagnosis, their ability to live well, and also treatment and care. So one in three people said that arthritis um had severely or very severely impacted their life in the past year. Six in 10 people are living in pain some or all of the time due to their condition. Four in 10 people felt they didn't that other people didn't understand their condition or the impact that their arthritis can have on their lives. And people also told her that their arthritis had a negative effect on their personal relationships, on their sleep, on their hobbies and their ability to plan for a family. In addition, we found that nearly half of people reported their ability to exercise was affected by their arthritis symptoms and one in three people felt their condition is not well managed. And you can see from the quote on the right hand side, this person describes being in constant pain, having low mood all of the time, no energy, and feeling alone. And he describes his living with arthritis as a living hell. So the impact is really quite severe. Our second chapter, uneven and unfair, looks at the health inequalities that came out across demographics throughout the survey. So, health inequalities are avoidable and unfair differences in health status between groups or communities. And we know that people living in the poorest neighborhoods will spend more of their lives with a disability and die earlier than people living in the richest neighborhoods. Simply put, the health system works less well for poorer people and our survey found similar experiences. So we found that people from lower social grades, younger adults which is those aged 18 to 44 and those with autoimmune inflammatory conditions consistently reported worse experiences across all topics. So just to explain what I mean by those groupings. So social grade first of all is a standard variable um that you apply. It's calculated based on the chief income earner of the household and involves the use of a very complex complicated algorithm. Um, it considers a variety of variables such as job title, the type of work they do, whether they're self-employed or not, the type of organization they work for. Um, and all of these things kind of uh are put together to determine whether someone is in a lower social grade or in a higher social grade. And that's what we use. And then when we say autoimmune inflammatory conditions, so there are lots of different types of arthritis conditions um that we asked about in the survey and in terms of ease of reporting uh we group them together. So individuals who reported more than one arthritis condition were asked to select the condition they felt had the greatest impact on their lives and then individuals were then grouped based on either their only arthritis condition or their most impactful arthritis condition. So autoimmune inflammatory conditions covers a wide range of topics but it al includes conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, reactive arthritis and inflammatory arthritis. And these three groups consistently reported that their arthritis was less well managed. They reported more severe symptoms of pain and they reported higher levels of mental health struggles because of their condition including isolation and stigma. And we can see on the right hand side um a quote from a younger person who shared they felt that they weren't taken seriously because of their age because um it was perceived that someone with their age uh wouldn't and couldn't have arthritis um but they felt that they lost a side of themselves because of that. Many of the differences um are highlighted in this chapter, but we also found health inequalities throughout the survey and many differences are highlighted throughout the other chapters too, which I'll pull out in the next slides. Chapter three is too long to wait. So, we found that people reported struggling to get a diagnosis for their condition and the process of getting a diagnosis took too long. With conditions such as inflammatory forms of arthritis, early diagnosis is actually crucial to be able to start treatment and prevent the condition from progressing and worsening. So, of those we spoke to, four in 10 people felt the process of getting a diagnosis took too long. Nearly half of them thought their symptoms weren't taken seriously or their symptoms were underplayed when they were trying to identify their arthritis condition with a healthare professional. And unfortunately, this experience was higher for those in lower social grades. Six in 10 people said that hadn't diagnosis validated their experience and this actually increases to 70% for people with autoimmune inflammatory conditions. And two in three people said that waiting for a treatment had impacted their mental health somewhat or a great deal. And again the impact was higher among those in lower social grades. And you can see uh the quote from the right hand side is from a younger adult and was from an autoimmune inflammatory condition. And they share that if it's hard to wonder if they'd not been diagnosed and treated sooner if the impact would have been lessened for both themselves and their NHS. Chapter four covers barriers to effective care. So accessing effective treatment is a critical part of managing arthritis. And yet many patients face significant obstacles that prevent them from getting the care that they need. So when we look at accessing healthcare, nearly six in 10 people disagree that they could access reviews to discuss the state of their condition and treatment for as often as they felt they needed. More than half of them said that treatment does not help them live the life they want to lead. Almost four in 10 of them said that [clears throat] difficulty traveling to get to treatment made it harder for them to access that treatment. And this is actually uh worse and worse in lower cases of lower social grades compared to higher social grades. And again those from lower social grades reported higher levels of impact on accessing and also the effectiveness of treatment compared to those from higher social grades. And on the right hand side we have a quote um from someone who lives in a rural part of the country who describes how difficult it is um for him to go to get to where he needs to get to for treatment um but has has no other options and how his condition completely dominates his life um and everything that he tries to do. So we can see how impactful those barriers can be on someone's ability to live well and live the life they want to lead. And our final chapter, chapter five, the personal cost of arthritis. So many people with arthritis reported that their condition limits not only how they work and their access to work but whether they can work at all. And in addition, arthritis often comes with um e extra extra and hidden costs. Uh for example, people might need certain adaptations to their home or the equipment that they use and they might incur additional travel needs getting to and from treatment. So of everyone we surveyed, half of the people said that arthritis had impacted their ability to work in some way. And of these, nearly four in 10 have had to stop work due to their arthritis. Arthritis and msk conditions are among the leading causes of workplace absence in the UK. In 2022, they accounted for 23.4 million days lost in work. And this was up from 23.3 million in 2021. For those who aren't able to work anymore, over a third of those retired said that arthritis have played a part in their decision to retire. And when we look at the increased personal expenditures, four in 10 people said that having arthritis had increased their personal expenditures in the past 12 months. And if we look at those through a health inequalities lens when looking at both decreased ability to earn and the increased personal expenditure, those from lower social grades and those with autoimmune inflammatory conditions were more significantly affected. And we can see from the stories at the bottom that someone had to give up their job because they were no longer physically able to do their job because of their arthritis condition. And on the on the right hand side, uh someone's condition actually stopped them from progressing in their career and taking on a management role because they weren't physically able to meet the expectations of sitting in all meetings and having longer working hours uh due to their condition. So in conclusion, many people with arthritis aren't able to live the life they want to lead because of their condition. But really importantly, the impact of living with arthritis isn't being felt equally. People from lower social grades, younger adults, and those with autoimmune inflammatory conditions are being disproportionately impacted. They're facing greater challenges and more frequent barriers. Our report includes five policy recommendations. I won't go into them in detail, but just to cover them quickly. The first one is about recognizing arthritis and MSK conditions as a major public health issue. The second is about ensuring that people with arthritis have equal access to personalized treatment and care regardless of where they live. The third is about improving the quality and availability of data. The fourth is about improving and embedding training for all frontline healthare professionals which will improve diagnosis and support. And the final one is about protecting people being pushed into poverty and hardship because of their condition. So these interventions would result in higher quality services. They reduce inequalities, improve diagnosis and support and lead to greater visibility of arthritis and MSK health through the data. Um, I'll pop this link into the chat uh with the full report, please do go read it as there's a lot more in there. Um, but I'm really happy to take any questions now, but if you'd like to check a chat um in kind of in more depth or have any kind of bigger questions, please also do get in touch and I'll pop our email address in the chat as well. Thank you so much. &gt;&gt; What next for these what's next for these findings? Um, you know, where where are they going? You know, who needs to see them? &gt;&gt; Sorry, I think I missed the first part of that question. So what so you you've had those recommendations those five recommendations in there I think it was um so where are those go they go that those recommendations kind of what what's next for the the report and these findings. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So we have an incredible policy team um who work across all five of those uh recommendations and they are taking them forward. So we're kind of building our evidence base uh kind of across each five and kind of looking at gaps and what we need. Um and we're in conversations and building relationships with the relevant kind of policy makers, other charities that can support um and kind of NHS clinicians and really building those relationships there. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. And and um what how um accurate did you uh did you think the sample was of people who participated in the survey? you know, knowing more about the the population with arthritis, you know, how how confident are you in the sample? &gt;&gt; Yeah, we're really happy. So, an almost 8,000 sample is is a really hefty survey uh for this kind of thing and uh we work really closely with you gov to make sure that it was weighted as we say. So, the conditions were represented um age groups represented um and things like that. There were areas that we weren't able to um kind of get a really robust sample on. So, we're aware that ethnicity was kind of a low point for us. we weren't able to break that down and draw any any meaningful conclusions. So, that's something we're going to kind of take forward and look at um a bit more specifically. &gt;&gt; Okay. And just got a couple more questions and again you linked to those sort of the sample and those recommendations were was there was there an element of co-production in the recommend coming up with the recommendations at all? Was that you know how have they sort of been reviewed by by people who contributed maybe? Yeah. So, the policy recommendations um were developed by a policy team who historically have um done a lot of work um with that to so they're kind of they're not new for the organization. Um the recommendations new for this report, they're kind of a continuation of what we've been calling for and been working on for a little while, but we just have this new data um to back them up and kind of give them a little bit more direction and weight. &gt;&gt; Okay. And was there any Yeah. Was there a particular challenge that you faced during kind of this data collection and um you know and interpretation and analysis that you'd you kind of you learned from when doing a kind of really substantial piece of work like that that you could share with the group? &gt;&gt; Um unfortunately I'll be really honest. I only joined the organization a couple of months ago. So I caught the back end of this project. So I'm not the person that actually ran it. Um so unfortunately not. I think there was um I know that when we used Yugus panel primarily um and then kind of didn't meet all of the targets we wanted to hit in terms of people with certain conditions, age groups, etc. which is why we then went out through uh the charities social media to recruit additional panels. So I think about five and a half of those were from Yugov and the remaining so almost two and a half to three were from um our own social channels. So we we did have to kind of there was a bit of a back and forth on that on supplementing the sample to make sure it was kind of robust and representative as possible. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thank you. Um we're just getting the the next presenter to in slightly. So we do have time for one more question. It's quite a specific one. Um if if if you've got the answer to it. So we've asked someone's asked about um patients with inflammatory uh arthritis um and the fact they seem to have a worse experience. Is there any are there any conclusions that have been come to on why this might be the case? &gt;&gt; Sorry, can you hear me Katie? &gt;&gt; Yeah, sorry I'm cutting out a little bit. &gt;&gt; Sorry. Do you want me to repeat the question? &gt;&gt; Yes, please. Thank you. &gt;&gt; No worries. No worries. Um so the question was about uh the findings relating to patients with inflammatory uh arthritis uh and they seem to be having a worse experience. Um is are there any conclusions drawn about why this might be the case? &gt;&gt; Um from this survey that's something we're going to kind of try and take forward and look into this group more specifically. Um, it's, you know, we can we can make some assumptions, but kind of not anything uh super meaningful that I would want to kind of put out into the universe without kind [laughter] of double-checking first. But I'm really happy to discuss that with the person that asked that question if they want to get in touch um and we can have a more detailed conversation. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much.