Afternoon everybody. Uh welcome um to this session of the health and care analysts conference. Uh this is a targeting care advancing analytics stream. My name is Sean Rick. I'm associate director healthcare data analytics at the national institute for health and care excellence or NICE as we like to be called and I'll be chairing uh this session. So a few uh quick housekeeping points that you're probably all aware of by now. So, please use the Q&amp;A to submit your questions at any time. You can upvote questions you're most interested in. Um, you can, you know, comment in the chat for reflections and discussion points. You can also view the speaker bios and connect with speakers in the people tab and also you can kind of uh take notes within the platform directly. So, in the interest of time, I'll get on with things um and introduce our first speaker for this session which is Chris Beely. He's head of data science at the strategy unit and his uh talk is titled multi-disiplinary analytical pipelines productionizing a business critical simulation model. So over to you Chris you've got uh about 25 minutes including questions as well. &gt;&gt; Right. Thank you very much. Uh if you could please add my uh slides. Uh CLA that'd be good. Thank you very much. Uh right hello everyone. Um it's nice to be back. uh feeling slightly less pressure doing this uh talk than I have been on in the in the backstage doing all the complicated admin stuff. Um so basically this presentation um is all about building a simulation model uh as my team and I have been engaged in doing for about two two yearsish. Um and um I think that doing it well required a lot of collaboration from a lot of different staff not just data scientists all kinds of different staff uh analytical and non analytical uh with lots of different skill sets. Um I do think a lot of this stuff around the modeling is not obvious. Um and so that's why I want to talk about some of it today. Um, so I think that's one of the things I think that's nice about Hacker is that uh, you know, we can sort of dig in a little bit and we don't just talk about regression lines. We can also just talk about some of the stuff that kind of sits around the the analysis and kind of how to get from A to B in that sense. Uh, so that's what I'm like to uh would like to talk about. Um, so the new hospital program uh came to the strategy unit uh roughly in the year 2020. Um and the exam question was to um predict uh demand in acute hospitals roughly in the year 2041 varying slightly but that kind of range. Um there was existing work um and knowledge in the strategy unit. There is obviously literature on this as well. Uh and so the model was built on those foundations. I was not here when this project was conceived. I only was I uh my team only existed in the kind of uh data sciency bit. Um, so I can't take blame or credit for that bit, but that those are the origins. Uh, I've just realized that or rather unhelpfully I forgot to set a timer, but never mind. It's uh I need to remember five to three. Right. So I just want to talk a little bit about kind of um how we've done it um because I think um we've done it based on our beliefs uh to a large degree and I think that's really important. Um so we in the strategy unit think that uh predictive models should as far as possible be probabilistic. We don't think it makes sense when there's so much uncertainty about the future to give point estimates um because they will you know be wrong. Predictions are usually wrong but point estimates will be even more wronger if you like. Um we think that uh analytical work should be transparent and open source. Uh people who've heard me speak for more than about 10 minutes will no doubt heard me say the word open source before. Um I think it's really important. I think it's partly what hacker is about. But I think in this case we are talking essentially about modeling work that feeds into a variety of processes that build billion pound hospitals. Um and so personally I think it's an absolute no-brainer that the analysis uh the foundations of that analysis should be uh you know transparent and in the public record. That's not happening enough elsewhere. That's a different talk for me to bang on about but that's one of the things that we believe. Um, it was done in a collaborative way. Um, my colleague Karen and I spoke about that a little bit uh yesterday. Um, I'm not going to go into too much detail about that because Karen spoke about it very um, very eloquently yesterday, but essentially it's not about modeling to people. It's about modeling with them. You know, listening to them, understanding their assumptions, understanding the way that they view the world. Uh, we think that results should be reproducible. uh which is very much um in line with the sort of open source and transparency uh argument again because we're building billion pound hospitals I think the need for that is even greater um and we think that uh modeling should be done uh as far as possible as far as is sensible by the NHS and for the NHS um I think uh too often our sort of analytical futures are held um in the hands of um companies and individuals um that don't necessarily have a kind of public benefit ethos Um, and I think that's a real shame and I think um, the NHS can really um, you know, get on the front foot and start to own more of these things in the way that we've done. It did win an award. Um, the uh, there's a link to to more details about that on the slides which I'll share somehow uh, at some point. They're not they're not currently viewable, I'm afraid. I haven't quite published them yet, but they will be. Uh, oh, I'm on the wrong window. There we go. So what does the model do? So I'm going to be a little bit brief about this because I want to talk about a wide range of different things. Um but essentially the model considers various types of things that you might expect to either increase or decrease hospital activity. Um those are include uh demographic change. So we expect in the future there will be more people and those people will be older. Um and that would lead you to believe that there will be more activity happening in hospital. There's something else called non-demographic change which for me is definitely a contender in the worst named thing ever. Um because it's just everything that's left after demographic change but essentially has no meaning really. Um but examples of that tend to be things like um we invent new ways of doing things. We invent new things we couldn't do before. Patients quite rightly want more care. They want a better experience. there's just this sort of relentless march um of healthcare activity and healthcare technology which clearly is a good thing and it's one of the marvelous benefits and something that I've certainly benefited a great deal over the last decade. Um but it does obviously tend to mean that our hospitals will be busier. Um and then something else that we call um types of potentially mitigical activity um so-called left shift. Um so that is all sorts of different things. uh if fewer people smoke there wouldn't be so much things in hospitals going on to do with people smoking. If we had good uh or better care pathways around uh frail and elderly uh there might be differences with with falls. All that kind of thing all comes under that. Uh one of the important parts of this work I think is that we've sort of tried to kind of codify and document those as I say openly and reproducibly and transparently in a way that will allow other people to to understand what we've done and to reuse it. And there are other modeling components as well that we'd like to build on uh in the future. Um so um the model is a simulation model. It's a Monte Carlo simulation. Uh so essentially what we do there's loads of parameters um as described in on the previous slide. Uh they are all parameterized. We assume that the parameters will be normal because it's just easier. Uh we might do something a bit clever one day but we haven't yet. Um and we calculate demand uh within the hospital at various different slices of data. You know, obviously things like impatients, outpatients, A and E. We do this 256 times. Uh you know, sampling the parameters differently each time. And we plot the distribution. Um one of the nice things about the model is that the the results are concept come out conceptually at row level. I'm not going to overdo this because I don't really have time. But what that means essentially is that we take a year's worth of data and we we take those individual rows and we either multiply them up or down depending on, you know, who that person is, how old they are, what's wrong with them, you know, all that kind of thing. Do we think there'll be more people like this in the future or do we think there'll be fewer? And that's a kind of multiplicative effect of all the things that grow it and all the things that shrink it. Um, and we use password sampling. So obviously don't get.3 of the patient because that doesn't make any sense. Uh in practice what comes out the model actually is not row level because that would melt the server. But we can slice it in different ways and we have done that. We have been asked well what how does it look if you slide this? How do you look if this and we can add that into the model. Um so that's a very kind of um quick counter through the kind of um some of the concepts of it. uh from a data science point of view um I'm not going to do one of those thing one of the classic things that people do where they show you a huge diagram and they say I'm sorry for this diagram um because there's really no point because it won't make any sense to you and it'd be too small and uh confusing on the screen but there is one if you want one there is a link in the slide um basically there are there are three places where we do stuff and there's a variety of reasons why stuff happens in different places and it's partly to do with information governance uh so we store and process the data in the kind a secure um CSU provisioned at um Azure. Um we did used to use SQL. Uh the data pipelines take literally 4 days to run in SQL. Uh and that can be extremely difficult if you're tinkering with them. Um so we actually use data bricks now and it's very wizzy and uh cool. Please don't ask me to explain data bricks because I will fail. Uh but my team use it very enormously and very brilliantly. Uh and the compute is handled uh with a docker container. Uh so we host the results and the dashboards and the reports and all that separately on a different server. Uh that server is it's I mean it's not an open server but it's connected to the internet so so people can see it hospitals and s such like so we don't keep any data on it because obviously it might be a bad idea. Um and we obviously have a lots of you know a plethora as you'd expect of notebooks scripts bits of you know ephemerra on laptops. Um I do think we do a really good job actually tidying those up occasionally and um you know making them really clear and consistent and reusable. Um but those are the kind of three the three main places where this is all going on. Um so one of the big challenges of doing this has been in versioning. So we've been developing the model for some time now for pretty much two years. Uh well more than two years in fact um and we don't want to stop developing the model because we want to keep improving it but we also don't want to stop other people's you know we don't want to kind of have old models um not work or become out of date or become difficult to use or so we've learned an incredible amount. I always wish I could get in a time machine but I'm sure we all do. We've learned an incredible amount about how to do that. Uh well I say we my my I mean my brilliant team have learned that. Um simply uh the question really for us is are we Apple or are we Microsoft and what that means is there's the Apple way of doing things where you just upgrade everyone's operating system and say I'm sorry Halfway software doesn't work tough lock kind of thing. Uh and there's the Microsoft we will support your you know Windows XP for nuclear submarines you know running on a remote island until you know the year 20 57. Um, at the moment I would say we are Microsoft and that is quite challenging and I think we'd like to be more Apple and we're trying to figure out what's a responsible sensible way of doing that. Uh, particularly versioning of data uh is very difficult. We do want to be able to reproduce these results and allow people to make sense of them in the future because people are building billionos hospitals with them. Uh, but it is not it is not easy to to to improve this thing and keep on using it at the same time. That's not a simple thing to do. Uh something else that's not simple is using uh rap reproducible analyical pipelines. Of course they're awesome. Um of course we all think that. Um but I think it's just interesting to reflect actually that they have at times slowed us down quite a lot. Uh and I really buy into that slowdown and I really believe in it. But I think it's just worth kind of being honest and being aware of it. So we had something the other day, millions of rows of data, millions of rows. and one of them was wrong. We had a basically a row of data that was wrong and the exam question is take out that row of data. Now, obviously in the bad old days, I would have just bust out my spreadsheet and just press control minus and it's gone. Um, but of course that's a really bad idea because you'll never be able to find it again and you don't remember that you did that. Um, but applying a rap approach to that actually is quite hard and it took us it took us it took a a bit of a go. Um, so I just think this project's a really interesting example. I mean, not very often rat will rat will save you time 99.99999% of the time, but actually just occasionally it can be it can be tricky. I just thought that was an interesting um reflection. Um some of the challenges we face along the way, well all models are wrong. We all know that. Um but it's you know you can argue about well which kind of wrong do we want? You end up in that kind of situation. Um people have different types of wrong. people value different types of wrong differently depending on who they are. Um there's a real thing about consistency. So one of the real benefits I think of this using this model is that it it is um something that is consistently applied across you know those hospitals that are using it. it has a a defined set of you know SQL and you know there are ways of of of of using this in a consistent way but actually there are good reasons to say well actually this hospital is different because of this or that or the other and managing that process between trying to have a a really well-defined um set of ways of doing something but allowing people to meaningfully vary from it is is is challenging. Um it's difficult to make predictions especially about the future. We all know that one as well. Um I mean the truth is we don't know what's going to happen. Uh one of the quotes that I really enjoy about this model is the model is simple. That's from one of my team Tom. Um what he means by that basically is this model will just do whatever stupid thing you tell it to do. That's it's a very clear example of that. Um if you put things into this model that are correct about the future, it will tell you the future very precisely. If you feed it nonsense, it will talk nonsense. And you know that's really challenging. People want it to to do more but you know that that certainty is not there. It reminds me a little bit actually what Jess was saying yesterday is AI is not magic and neither is this. This model will tell you whatever you believe basically but in a kind of reliably statistically kind of um informed way essentially. That's what it's doing. Um one of the ways that we got around that was we asked experts. I'm not going to linger on this for too long because I don't really have time. It's a whole other talk really. This was Professor Muhammad in the strategy unit, but basically we built some wizzy data science tool and we ask people what do you think will happen in the future? Um, and we um we we collected what they believed and we show that to um hospitals to help them to understand uh what might happen for them. And it's, you know, it's very um understanding, you know, frail care pathways in your area. That's a very localized thing. You know, a civil servant in Whiteall can't come along and tell you that. They they, you know, they don't know and nor should they. Um we had a lot of challenges about um understanding people as users. I have got another talk a bit later on actually where I'm going to use the word users a lot. Um but essentially who is using this model and what do they want? Um it seems like an obvious you know seems like a basic question but the more you think about it uh the the perspectives multiply um and they are still multiplying and that's really challenging and coming up with structured ways of thinking about that I think has been a big um a big benefit to this thing something that held us back but I think something that we're really building on um decision-m um I just yeah I don't know I guess this talk is partly I guess maybe in as many of my talks are they're sort of letters to to the past from myself to myself. Um, again, it feels a little trivial to to but it it really isn't. Making decisions in this kind of our environment is very very difficult. So, you've got very very sort of theoretical ideas about the way that data is kind of provisioned and you know uh sliced and defined. Um, and you've got very very boots on the ground pragmatic interpretations um from analysts and from hospitals. um and they're very different and that's really challenging and it's all being delivered with data science. So you can well come up with something that you want to happen but sometimes I go to the team and say oh this you know and they say well that doesn't you know that's not possible or it would take a computer a thousand years or you know whatever it might be um and yeah there is just lots of lots of fingers in the pie and that's obviously a good thing. um that it can be it can be difficult to kind of uh to to to navigate that. Um I think we still have a challenge with openness and transparency, something I really believe in. Uh I will die on this hill. You don't often hear that said literally, do you? Um I think but it's hard. So we have open source all the code. Um but in order to run it um you really well you need a copy of hairs for one. Um, but actually you need quite a lot of kind of tooling and you it's not it's not something that's simple to do. Um, and I you know me and the team take that really seriously and we do want to do our due diligence and be good citizens. Um, but I think the big problem is I never get a team's call at 9:00 a.m. saying quick Chris share the model. You know that's not something that generates urgent action. Um, and so it's something that we want to keep going on. Uh, information governance obviously always is a trap. I won't linger on that again in the interest of time. Um right my final slide bang on time. Um just wanted to talk about kind of where we're going with it really. So we started uh with a model that was designed to be run by hospital and it's uh worked pretty well so far I would say although we're still learning as I've mentioned um we've already run it at national level and we're starting to look more about how we could look at acute activity in a whole region. I think that lots of interest uh in that a bring your own data model would be wonderful. I'd love to do that. I think there may be a future for FDP. I am supposed to be getting to grips with that at the moment and will be soon. Um that would release a lot of the IG problems. I think that would be a real benefit, but I don't currently know whether that's possible because I haven't really got to grips with it. And again, whenever I say I haven't got to grips with it, I mean my brilliant team haven't got to grips with it. Uh we're still trying to understand more about these categories of potentially activity that I mentioned. Um are there more of them? Are there fewer of them? Are they well the fire? There's all kinds of questions to be asked um about that. Um and I think yes this whole business obviously we've been hearing today and other times understanding you know the shift from the hospital community how will it happen why does it matter where is that going to go all of these questions all feed into that and I think there's lots of interesting analytical work uh to be done along those lines. So thank you very much I will now stop talking. &gt;&gt; Thanks Chris. Thanks very much for Can you Can you hear me? Okay. &gt;&gt; Yes. No, that was great. Okay. Um, yeah, that was really really a great talk. Um, and really interesting and well done sticking to time as well. Um, I can't see any questions in the Q&amp;A at the moment. Um, so I'll use my kind of chair's prerogative to ask the question. Uh, so I guess I guess we're talking through really interesting um point you made about the Apple versus Microsoft model really. Um, so I was like wondering do you have like a sense of like of the scale of the problem you of using the Microsoft model of that kind of continued support forever and the kind of headaches that causes you? &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean I think the biggest problem I'm sure my team will be shouting at the screen because I'll probably get this wrong but my understanding is the biggest problem we have is with data. So, um, a lot of the way that we've versioned data up till now has been to have a copy of that data, um, because that's a really reliable and sensible way of versioning data, but you end up with more and more and more data. So we I think we're slightly fighting a battle at the moment um to make sure that uh we have um yeah we can reproduce what we've done but without just kind of accreting more and more and more uh data to that point as well I think the other thing is people so we're kind of custodian I mean you know I always tell people don't make me the custodian but I you know I don't know how seriously people take that we we're actually custodians of lots of parameters so people have run lots of models mod. They've run models to iterate. They've run models to answer questions. They've run models for business cases. You know, each it's not a oneanddone process running these model and nor should it be. You know, there's scenario analysis, all that kind of stuff that goes into modeling. Um, and again, so we're again we're sort of accreing parameters. Now, those parameters are not that's not a computational you it's not going to fill a hard drive because I'm just talking about parameters. Um, but how can we kind of work with them to make sure that they keep the ones that they want or they understand what they've got and all that kind of as I say I'm not don't really want to be the guy holding the keys to building all these billion pound hospitals because uh if I lose those keys or if I get them in the wrong place you know it's not it's not really my job. Um but nonetheless, you know, putting that to one side, putting the kind of real business critical stuff to one side, um how can we help people uh understand what they've gone and and where they've, you know, understand the scenarios that they built and and all that kind of and we are currently working on on on tooling to do that. Thank you. Um, I can't see any other questions, but I suppose in in the chat, I guess there's just been some acknowledgement of a uh really great presentation. I suppose kind of a a half question in terms of how you protect your time um without trying to be forced to move on to the next project and how you kind of how would you address those uh challenges and do you have those? Um yes I mean this project has a lot of steam uh so I don't think that that is a is a direct problem for us. I think the the ally problem though is how do you separate kind of uh operational work versus strategic work. So as I say we are building a model for the future. We are building a model that does different things. It answers questions in different ways. We're building features for people. Um, but also we have people who have a meeting at 10:30 a.m. and want to check whether this parameter changes, you know, all that kind of stuff. Uh, it's something that I mean it's very related to what Steven was talking about earlier. Um, it's a hard it's a very hard thing to do. I think my advice is there's two main pieces of advice really. I think number one and this is again another talk use scrum and use agile to have better conversations about no um have a road map that helps people to know where you're going so they can see what they're losing by having you run around like a headless you can do an operational stuff uh and I think the probably the biggest one which is very unhelpful because we're not really in charge of this is work in a sane organization the organization I work in is very sane they value careful controlled proper work um It's very very very hard to do your job properly if you're not in an organization like that. Uh I know that's not very good advice because what do you do about that? Um perhaps I'm talking to people uh who might be able to influence those who are behaving in that way uh to understand what you know what they're what they're losing. This this constant rush for operational results really hobbles us in the long run. It really stops us from investing for the future. And I think that's a real shame and I think we all need to talk about that and and kind of stand up for ourselves. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Very good answer to that question. Um, so yes, in interesting times, we'll move on to our next speaker. Thanks very much again, Chris. That was a really interesting piece of work.