Over to you, Shay Yun. Uh, I'll share the screen in just a second and I'll leave you on screen with it. Can you see that? Okay. Just let me know when you want me to move on. &gt;&gt; Yes. Hi. Hello everyone. Yeah, this is Chion, a data scientist working in the workforce training and education area. Yeah, I am uh mainly working for the community pharmacy and today talk is about how to design a model uh for community pharmacy with a opensource data. Uh next slide please Mamoda can you hear me? Yeah, thank you. Yes. Uh right. So this model uh is converting the Excel to Python and then it was built last year to inform some of the planning for NHS services delivered in high street pharmacy premises. I know some people have a different definition when we are referring the community pharmacy but in this context uh for my today's session I refer community pharmacy as for the high street pharmacy that you would see like boots or tesco or yeah anywhere like chemistry focusing on the two key profession uh which which are regulated by DGPHC meaning the pharmacist and the pharmacy technicians that's going to be the scope of today's So thank you. Next slide please. So today has uh consisted with three sections. One is for the referring the points of where do I really get a publicly available data. Of course because I am working at NHS England and having some internal data set available for the employees but uh this session is uh just to make some points of public available data sources so that anybody yeah who can access to the web is going to be possible to build something yeah from the scratch on the interest that's going to be the first aim second uh how to construct so yeah the data with the Python data pipeline Fine. Lastly, I want to just briefly yeah to cover some AI generated code parts. What do I mean by really about the human in that loop? So yeah, that three points are going to be the main theme. Next, next please. I was hoping to really share my screen. Yeah. To click uh and see which types of the data and that what is the actual data looks like. But yeah due to the interest of time I will just skip that part. uh briefly the three datas have I listed in here. I have listed here GPHC register data is available and then community wall for survey which is mandated uh by regulation since October 2022 uh is also available in public. And the last point is about the uh NHSPSA uh published the consolidated format list which is accessible uh via uh API but also it's okay to download uh as a Excel or the CS35 format whichever the preferred format. Uh just a reminder this session does not cover really the full scope of the NHS long-term workforce planning which is why I have only uh shortlisted uh the three data sets. Uh in truth uh the whole model is referring several more and yeah probably more uh of the data list I could introduce uh where possible but yeah let's compromise today with these three data sets. Next slide please. So yeah, now we are going to cover the Python data pipeline. I have uh created a GitHub repository which is also publicly accessible. So once you are going uh please kindly uh click the link uh the repository. So it's uh all there the code examples I have archived and then made it available for everybody. Just two point I wanted to introduce in this call is one side for the data perspective I have created intentionally the branch uh so that the each branches uh of the data point could have not mixed up with the other data sources. I have used some AI but also because I use the branches against each data sources. Every development related to the data sources are just contained uh inside the branch. So yeah we can just have a look uh whatever the interest of the data point at the beginning. The code structures uh are as like in the screenshot. So data uh and the source script and then yeah I have put some more information in the document and the resume file. Next slide please. So historically because workforce modeling has lived in Excel and Excel is actually a powerful tool uh like uh capable for many things really and then uh when we are discussing about the Pythonizing or the building a pipeline in Python I didn't want to and I don't want to mix up the messages as like Python can do only a thing because it's not Excel can also do the basic fundamental the analytical skills. For example, I'm giving a screenshot uh of the data normalization. So in this type of fundamental analytical skills could be done in Excel regardless of which platform you are on. So hopefully I don't uh make a contradictory uh the voices uh against your preferred to next slide please. But moving from the Excel uh we would Oh, next slide please. Yeah. But moving from the Excel, the benefit of uh the streamline things into a system is giving us such a huge benefit. Uh at NHS England, I am having the data uh for example like a secret management server. uh which is actually quite nice uh for keeping the scalable data and then it does offer the job uh for data integrity and the scalability because of my current working environment I have started to start a secret query but why stop here and because I do have the other types of two Python or R to make designing a dynamic model and this session hopefully yeah to provide the starting points. Next slide, please. So, uh I'm pretty certain that the people who joined for today's session is okay with SQL or the C3 because the repository I had directed uh to you was not really having too many crazy the data set the size and the level of the granularity. So I will skip the two parts but would like to emphasize about the how to start uh with the data API and that does work well with the third example which is the NHSPSA using the open API uh platform. So once you log in to this platform you immediately see the list available download uh the excel but also uh you can have some starting the scratch really like example the query so let's start with that one and then I am interested in the pharmacy open hours uh I have marked as a yeah red boundary the boxes so I want to retrieve that information from the uh data API. So the example code stored in the GitHub repository is starting from there. Next slide please. Yeah. So the steps are really uh the first visit the data set page and then the second browse available data resources. Currently this example has been released by quarter. So the resource ID has been splitted by each quarter and then you could be just to find uh the relevant uh the quarter and the year information wherever possible and depend on your interest. So let's use the resource ID variable uh I set in the example script align 2 36 to match your desired quarter. And then if you're just running the example script then that script would automatically handle the uh the old records uh as I referred to the beginning uh for the column I was interested in. Next slide please. So once we are running that the script the results can be also print and then we can have that on the command uh line as a prompt. Uh because I have printed some total pharmacist the number of total pharmacist in a certain finance year and then the average week hour because I was interested in how many hours the localarmacies are open in general. So that can be uh encapsulated and then assigned into a variable so that I can package the code and then relate that to the next function I want to use against. So for example let's suppose I have a built something a function uh this function is generated for this demo only. So the function I'm using is referencing the variable I have retrieved and pull down from the data API. For example, the the total number of the pharmacies such like 1,522. Uh that number is going to be inside the variable that I'm just making a mark point. uh the arrow is pointing at uh so that the function will get that input data and then return uh the output according to the calculation that's going to be the one example again yeah please uh do have a look at the GitHub repository next slide please so yeah last point really I wanted to make uh a stress is it is important to understand about something uh human can do versus the AI uh can do. Uh when I have started my modeling with some of the AI powered tool like cursor, I really thought sometimes it's overwhelmed because uh it don't it's just going to be me only sitting and then because the information and the speed of development speed of the development are sometimes too fast. uh so I tried to make myself the principle which could be uh done in my test uh that's going to be so called human in the loop let me clarify the term yeah as for the uh details in next slide please so usually uh the human in the loop uh is referring the process of using the human feedback to improve an AI model uh for the audience Ians who have experience interacting with the chap for example then you would have observed that there is a thumbs up uh the button to evaluate uh if the answer the AI has generated is cool enough or you're not happy about it. So those type of a simple evaluation loop is sometimes called as a human in the loop in tax. uh it often really uh provide a simple validation step but what I had extended at the time uh for this session especially is next slide please I extended uh the guideline uh myself giving to the prompt uh so that the model can work better as well for example with example of the GPAC the data set if I just copy and paste only the three lines of the simple data table and then put into the prompt and then ask AI to answer about yeah what does that mean? Then for the left blur the point in the middle screenshot is saying that a very generic answer but if I really give a prompt to an AI with some context focused on the GPHC or provided for the UK the profession then it does do a better job. I meant uh the human in the loop concept uh in this much extended uh way and then that's how the codebase uh stored in the GitHub repository is constructed and then generated. Thank you. Next slice. So using uh the AI prompt and the uh the AI powered tool, I have made some the initial workforce model starting from the data engineering such as okay starting from the uh something somewhere and then make a growth uh the production until the certain period of time that I put it into the config. Uh that's going to be something. And then the next setting is I prompt uh the AI to generate the simple the plot as well so that I can make some comparison table between the different scenarios. That's going to be something done easily on Excel but also moving from the Excel and then on boarding the same job to work with the Python that's going to be very initial model I have uh mentioned. Next slide please. and then depends on the data sources and then uh depends on the steps that I'm going forward to layer with the different types of data set if I am having more information um just yeah going for then I can I can just put yeah the things that to updated code and then of course the one of the strong uh strong benefit of using the GitHub is going to be really providing us to track the history of changes including the images as well. For example, this snip is referring the GitHub pointing the changes between uh previous one and the old the new one. So it just say the images source has been deleted and then new image has been added. So the working on the GitHub is a really good yeah the benefit uh of way of working. Next slide please. So uh I'm setting the scope as a England because I work at NHS England and then I put the community pharmacy workforce. Uh I'm not really meaning to include everything like hospital setting, secondary care, primary care care. There are pharmacist working in the GP as well. So I set my uh the scope clearly for the uh community pharmacy workforce only and then I'm only putting the unit of the currency of this model as like a full-time equivalent so that the original data sources such like the community pharmacy work for survey uh does the job to provide this data source uh and then the model I have constructed would do the production of uh the workforce based on the information I'm giving the model to build and it does also the job to plot a graph as well and then I'm adding the some nice print uh the formatting let's say uh to give some output in my summary as well so that's also uh one benefit I can make it flexible of the model next slide please so during my work uh really uh on the GitHub and Python and the publicly open uh the data sources. I really find some uh the advantage working on GitHub and with the Python and the open sources as well. Just one thing that I wanted to introduce was using the version history and then also using the GitHub release tag. You would have seen that my uh slide had been sometimes labeled as version 0.0. 0.1 or 0.0.2 to two I am increasing the minor burden or the major version uh incrementally uh depend on the how I define the changes meaningful to the entire model but the GitHub also does the great point of making the time stamp and then yeah the old time stamp can be compare each other so let's suppose I have a commit uh like five times and then I have packed that one as one version then the time stamp uh of the five comets can be also compared with the next five comets if I set the next time stamp 0.0.2 with the five commits after. So that's going to be uh the job in between um working to compare with both of the versions how things had been changed in time. Next please. Uh yeah so supply validation could be done in model. I will skip this part. I was going to demo some part but yeah since I have lost uh my availability yet to share my screen I will skip that part. Next please. So the conclusion is really about to keep in mind there is a human in the modeling loop because a human can understand which type of the information even though everything is publicly available because we live in a flow of the information and then not everything might not be very useful my scope of interest for example I didn't really reveal too many concepts uh behind the workforce planning such like participation rates or the regulation how things are going for the role with definition or sometimes yeah the pharmacy technician can go with the training faces capacity as well stuff like that uh could have been done by the the human which is why yeah we are very strong at looking at the domain knowledges alongside the skills we are equipped with the python such like python so yeah it's going to be a good reminder I wanted to deliver to audience Uh next slide please. Today to sum up my session I tried to point out a list of uh the public available data and then I also tried to introduce what's available if you go into the GitHub repository with some example the Python data pipeline is there and then yeah of course feedback is welcome. I also lastly uh briefly mentioned about what do I think about the AI and then what did I mean by the human in the loop uh for this uh modeling example. So hopefully that was sufficient enough and then yeah let me close the session with Q&amp;A. Thank you very much and there is also poster I have uploaded about the more interesting topic. If people find Vive coding then please have a look. There is another separate repository I have named and then would love to share uh with you further development in next time. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thank you Sher Yun for handling that like a pro. um and for um battling with all the technical issues we had at the beginning as well and perfectly getting through your presentation in perfect timing um to end. It would be great if you can share some of the links and resources um and we can share it with your recording of your presentation. Um and if we could also share the link to your poster that would be great too. Uh and we'll add it when we share your recording. Um and I can see that you've added the GitHub link as well that Nikki was just asking for. So that was going to be uh my question. We're at time at the moment. So if anybody's got any quick questions, you can add it into the chat or the Q&amp;A. Um otherwise, thank you, Shayun. And I imagine lots of people were paying attention to the step by step that you were taking them through in showing them what you did. Um and so it's very difficult to chat and pay attention to such a detailed presentation, but we appreciate you taking us through and guiding us through um what you did. And there's lots of great resources you shared as well as well as all the links to the various databases we have. So thank you very much um Shahude. We hope that uh everybody can check out the recording.