Right, with no further ado, I'm going to bring on the man of the hour, Steven Wyatt. Um, I have forgotten to look at the the title of Steven Wyatt's uh talk. Uh, so I'm not going to pretend that I have remembered to do that by looking at the program. Uh, Steven Wyatt is going to uh introduce uh him his talk title himself because I can't remember what it is. He's um head of research and policy at the strategy unit. Um very uh I've had the great pleasure to introduce lots of people actually uh in the first day and it's very much the same with Stephen. Uh lots of great ideas, lots of great research. So really looking forward to hearing what Steven's got to say. Thank you Stephen. &gt;&gt; Thank you Chris. Uh and good morning everybody. So, I'm going to be talking this morning about the model ICB blueprint um and the strategic commissioning guidance which was published a few months ago and I think that represents a great opportunity for advancing analysis within the health and care system over the next few years. I have to confess I'm feeling quite nervous this morning about this talk. I always do when I do presentations, but um I'm normally talking about projects that I've worked on. But this morning, I'm going to be expressing some opinions, and I'm really not sure what your reaction is going to be to those opinions. Opinions about the way we're organized um and the way the work that we do. Um you might think what I'm going to say today is completely obvious and uh uncontentious or you might find it a little bit disagreeable. Um, but because I'm going to be talking in terms of my opinions, I think it's probably important you know a little bit about who I am and my background so that you can understand my biases and my blind spots. So, like Chris says, I work for the strategy unit. I've been working for the unit since its inception and I lead the team's uh research and policy division. But first and foremost, I'm an analyst. Uh that's what I've been spending most of my career doing almost all of my career uh working as a healthcare analyst mainly within the NHS and then before that within local government social services departments. Uh I'm getting on a bit but if I'm lucky I'll be working for another 10 years or so. Um and my work is really important to me. uh it's a big part of my life and I really want analysis to find its feet and play a full role in addressing the challenges facing the health and care system over the next few years. So when I think about uh the work that I'm doing, one of my mental models is that I'm trying to find some sort of correspondence between entities in these three domains. the domain of the problems facing the health and care system, the domain of data and the domain of methods. Um, and fortunately for me, there's plenty of these things. We have lots of problems in the NHS that we need to address. We're we have loads of data to work with. And as an analyst, one of the joys is all the different methods that we can bring to bear to address those problems. And that that domain is growing all the time. new methods are being added in uh that might help us find new ways to address the problems we're facing. So an a eureka moment for me when I'm at work is when I find a neat correspondence between those three domains when I figure out a way of using a a method on a data set that's available to me to address or shed some insight onto a problem that we're facing in the NHS. But what I found odd though is that over my career um this way of working has has been quite a minority sport until fairly recently. But a number of initiatives over the last few years have made a real difference. I think one of the key catalysts for analyst analysis in the NHS was um the health foundation's advancing applied analytics grant program. It was a really successful grant program that ran over four or five different rounds. The Health Foundation awarded relatively small grants to health and care organizations to give analysts a bit of space and time to work out how to apply good methods uh to address the problems their organizations were facing. Um then we had the emergence of NHSR and the Python communities which I think also made a massive difference. Then we had the goldacre review and more recently these hacker conferences and I think each of those have played a role in advancing the impact and status of analysis within the NHS. But the mood of several of the keynote speakers from yesterday I noted was the same which is that they all felt that things were on the move with analysis but hadn't quite taken off yet. there was still more to be done to maximize optimize the impact of analysis within the health and care system and I think there's one factor which is hindering our progress uh which is what I'm going to talk mainly about today and that's about the unhealthy relationship that exists between business intelligence and analysis. So these are terms aren't perfectly defined. Um I understand that people will have different views on what these terms means. But for the purpose of this presentation, I'm going to offer a definition um which I'm going to ask you to go with for the remainder of the presentation. So first of all, the purpose of these two disciplines is very different. For business intelligence, the objective is to assemble and present information um in an accessible format to to decision makers and managers. Whereas the purpose of of analysis is to address the strategic challenges facing the organization, clinical or operational challenges facing an organization. So business intelligence very data oriented analysis very problem oriented. The outputs of these two disciplines are also quite different. For business intelligence, the outputs are mainly data and tables and charts increasingly delivered through interactive online platforms. Whereas the outputs for analysis are insights, prescriptions or recommendations for action. The time scales over which they operate are very different as well. When I started in the NHS, people would normally expect a few days to turn around a business intelligence request. These days, managers want that information on tap to be able to access whenever they want it. And there's a kind of a continuous uh development process that sits underneath a lot of these business intelligence platforms to make those systems better. And the coverage of data increased whereas analysis works through time limited projects that take typically a few weeks and a few months. The customers of the two disciplines are also very different. Business intelligence largely focused on performance management, performance managers whereas anal an analysis our customers are strategic planners, commissioners, service redesigners. The methods are also very different. Um business intelligence needs to be good at managing data pipelines, data anal uh descriptive analyses and data visualization. Increasingly software development and deployment. For analysis, the key skills are well, one of the strengths of analysis is the broad range of methods we can draw on that might describe or explain or predict uh prescribe action or evaluate services drawing from disciplines like statistics or operations research or econometrics or epidemiology. And the quality qualities that we value in these two disciplines are also quite different. For business intelligence, what people value is responsiveness and consistency and reliability. They want data as upto-date as possible, near real time ideally, and as specific as possible. They want the data to be about their organization or their specialty or the team they work in. Whereas for analysis, the qualities that people value in it above all else are things like perceptiveness and clarity. And actually, what we're looking for in analysis is generalizability of findings rather than specificity of those findings. Um so we have these two very different functions uh with very different outlooks and requiring very different skills. BI serving descriptions of the world as it is in detail and as quickly as possible and analysis seeking to explain or understand or predict taking a longer or a wider view of the problem. And the way we manage those services uh within health and care typically is to lump the two of them together to put a single person in charge of them and then to resource them collectively. That's the typical model that we see when we look at organizations. And the consequence is a classic case of the urgent crowding out the important um that the relatively urgent demands of BI tend to crowd out the the more latent demands of analysis. uh and our list remains a minority sport although I do think the balance has been corrected somewhat in recent years. You can see that in the balance of presentations that have taken place in hacker over the last few years. In the first year of hacker there was much more dominance of of of people talking about dashboards. This this time around it's much more balanced but I still don't think the balance is quite right. And this state of affairs is kind of self-perpetuating. it's hard to resist. Once you have this situation in place, um then what tends to happen is good analysts, young analysts join the organization hoping to do good analysis. They end up having to do business intelligence. They get bored and they leave or they get diskilled. And most of these teams tend to be led by people who are whose expertise is in business intelligence whose whose capability to develop analysts, young analysts, and make the case for analytical work is limited. And this leaves the NHS in quite a peculiar predicament, a wash with data, but lacking the insights it needs to address the most important and most complex challenges that we're facing. BI can definitely help us. It it it can help us in very particular circumstances. It's great when you're trying to get a good sense of a new territory to find the lay of the land. And it's useful when you're generating hypothesis. And if you like your canvan framework um then it's really useful if you're operating within the clear domain when the action that needs to follow from a data signal is really obvious and uncontentious where cause effect relationships are known and relatively simple and fixed. But most of the enduring problems facing the healthare system um at the moment are in these complicated and complex domains when cause effect relationships are quite intricate, dynamic or even unknown. And when BI crowds out analysis, then managers faced with problems in these complex and complicated domains, we leave them with dashboards to resolve those problems. We serve them with relatively simple counts or rates or summary statistics. We might give them time series or benchmarking. If we're lucky, we might see a confidence interval or a control chart. Um, we might see standardized rates. But the methods in that in that field are relatively simple. And those products are adequate for tactical responses but not for strategic responses to these more complicated problems. The belief that underpins business intelligence is if we can give the right data to enough managers at the right time as quickly as possible. um then those managers will be able to solve our [snorts] problems in the NHS. And I want us to kind of reflect a minute on how that's been going for us over the last few years. If we think about all of the data that's been served to all those people who have been trying to resolve the issue with timeliness of care in emergency departments over the last few years, how is that going for us? uh we see uh continued problems with with with that key problem and I'm just not sure that the solutions we're offering people um to address that issue the support we're offering people to address that issue is taking the right form at the moment. So I want to offer a couple of visual metaphors now um which kind of represent how I see the challenge uh facing uh our managers when they're looking into addressing some of these complex and complicated problems. So the first um metaphor kind of sees a manager lost on a cold wet hillside at night and they're trying to navigate their way off that hillside. So in this metaphor, what business intelligence offers to the manager is a very large box of matches. There's plenty of them and the manager can strike a match whenever they want to, but all it can do is kind of dimly illuminate the immediate surroundings. It might help them take the next step, but it's not going to point them in the right direction. Better still, that we provide the manager with a small number of well-built torches or beacons strategically located over the hillside to guide the manager to safety. And that's the way I see analysis. A second uh metaphor sees the manager faced with a complex problem and hungry for solutions. And what BI offers in that situation for me is a packet of crisps. It can be opened quickly and eaten. Uh but it doesn't satisfy the manager for long. They come back for more quite quickly. It can't sustain the manager. What the manager needs is some carefully prepared varied meals delivered periodically. And again, that's what analysis can offer. So the idea with both of these metaphors is the same that what BI offers is rapid but relatively superficial data when in some circumstances managers need deep well-crafted insights. So why can't managers see this dilemma and correct for it? Why don't managers call for more uh uh analysis and perhaps cut back a bit on on BI? And often when we get to this point in the debate, um the suggestion is that we need to get managers to be better commissioners of analysis, which would be great, but I'm just not quite sure we can rely on that as a solution, at least not in the short term. The reality is that the the the analysis is a very complex field. It takes a long time to learn. We you know, we all learn it through, you know, education and through many years of work. Um, and I'm just not sure it's reasonable to expect managers to know enough about our discipline so that they can commission uh or specify our work in detail. They need to be experts in their own domain and managers these days needed to know a little bit about it. They need to know this about HR and finance. I'm not sure it's reasonable to expect them to become good commissioners um of our work. There might be a few managers out there who are really interested in what we do and if we can find them we should support them and cherish them but I don't think we can rely on that. I think we need a second track. So this is my proposition. First of all um I think we need to recognize that these are two very dis different disciplines. They need to be managed by different people with different skill sets and we need to resource them separately. And that decision to separate the management and resourcing of business intelligence and analysis needs to be a strategic decision based on the belief that analysis can actually help solve the big problems facing healthcare. Uh but my proposal goes beyond that. Um I also think as well as this achieving this separation between BI and analytics um that uh we need for junior and middle-grade analysts to be managed by experienced analysts [snorts] not by generalists and not by people experts in business intelligence. We need to focus more on methods and methods development skills development among amongst our staff teams. We need higher levels of technical skills but also soft skills craft skills. They need to be good at problem structuring. When we learn new methods, we need to be able to work at how to communicate those methods to other people so that they can understand that what we've done and the implications of it. And finally, I think analysts need to step up. We can't wait, I don't think, for well ststructured problems to land on our desks perfectly formed for us to work on. We need to go out there. We need to engage with stakeholders. We need to identify critical knowledge gaps. We need to propose analyses. when we get the results, we need to advocate for them and we need to make recommendations. But of all of those things I've listed here, I think the first and most important is separating analysis and business intelligence. It's a kind of a critical first step for me. And when we've seen organizations that have done that, we see analysis flourish. So where does the model ICB blueprint fit into all of this? Well, the blueprint um recommends kind of a radical simplification of the role of ICBS. It strips out a lot of other functions and leaves strategic commissioning as its sole focus and it removes many maybe not all but many of the sort of performance management functions that are currently located within ICBS. Those it says will be handled in the future more by regions and providers. So the the opportunity might be um uh for uh for us to separate analysis and business intelligence and those lines. Let providers and regions manage our business intelligence functions. Uh if we need any residual support, then we should commission it from those organizations rather than seek to deliver it ourselves. you should let analysts focus on analysis uh who are going to by the way be absolutely essential if we're going to become good strategic commissioners. Now I understand that might feel a bit risky uh for ICBS at the moment to let go of business intelligence. It's something we've been relying on and delivering for a long time. But I just want to reassure you that it can work. In our experience, the strategy unit have been working kind of this way for the last 13 years. Um we don't deliver BI. We don't really manage data assets for other people. Um but we have good relationships and clear agreements with those that do. And we focus on what we can do best, which is identifying pertinent issues, structuring problems, performing good analysis with good methods, and trying to communicate the results of those as cleanly as we can. So, I want to assure you that this model can work even if it feels a bit risky. I'm going to turn now to the strategic commissioning guidance, which I think is a really good document. If you haven't had a chance to read through it, it's very thorough, very detailed. It presents a fairly conventional view I think of the commissioning process. PHM is mentioned but I see this as a little bit of a rowing back um of from the PHM conception of commissioning to something a bit more traditional and I think that's a sensible move but I me like to mention a risk and an oddity which I spotted in the in the in the document. So the risk first of all, so the ICB model blueprint kind of clears the decks for ICBS and then the strategic commissioning guidance comes in and fills up any space that's left with ICBS with a very long list, reasonable list, but nonetheless a long list of expectations. I think I counted over 80 instances uh of the sentences that started ICBS will or ICBS should. So there's lots of expectations now on ICBS in terms of the way they deliver strategic commissioning. And I worry a little bit that ICBS analysis will fall into a trap of trying to [snorts] tick off all of those requirements and lose sight of the endgame. And ultimately the end game with with commissioning is to develop new and better ways of distributing the resource that's available to it to improve the health outcomes of its population. So for example, the first step uh within a commissioning process is to carry out a needs analysis. Where does that start and stop? You could be doing that forever. It's an essential first step, but there'll be no prizes for ICBS that have a perfect needs analysis, but fail to redistribute their resource in any way, fail to take any explicit commissioning actions. So although the the guidance is unequivocal in the way it's expressed um I don't think anyone can really expect ICBS to do all of the things listed in that document. We can imagine checklists will be coming out maturity assessments but ICBS themselves need to find the balance between process and action. It can't be obsessed with the process of commissioning. I think that has been a failure of commissioning in the past. um it's done a lot of work but it hasn't failed it's failed to take the key actions to redistribute resource to improve health outcomes next I'm going to mention an oddity so the authors obviously believe that um analysis is central to strategic commissioning um but the document only refers to two types of analysis as far as I can see it talks about risk ratification and it talks about population segmentation and it mentioned those mentions those two techniques several times times, but it doesn't mention anything else. None of the other methods that are available to us to help us, analytical methods that are available to us to address the commissioning challenges get a mention at all. And that's particularly odd uh because I think the consensus is really moving against risk stratification at the moment. Um if you read Jess Moley's um great review, um she points out that in lots of cases risk stratification is doing more harm than good. Um, and I think maybe this sort of very peculiarly focused view of what analysis can do within commissioning illustrates maybe an earlier point I made that generalists don't have a great conception of the full range of methods available to us and we shouldn't let them dictate the methods that we use to address the problems in front of us. So how might it look if I if ICB analysts were freed up? What might that look like? Um well first of all I think analysts need to play a a much more active role in determining the where their efforts are focused. They need to find that sweet spot between the enduring problems facing the NHS and the healthare system and those things which are analytically tractable. I think they need to be working intensively on a small number of projects each year. Um and these are the sorts of things I think maybe uh that analysts need to be working on. These are the sorts of topics. These are just some examples. Uh so over the next few years we know that uh the number of deaths in this country are going to be rising quite rapidly. We need desperately to expand hospice provision so that those deaths don't occur in hospitals which nobody wants. [sighs] Um and the national audit office put a really good report out uh a few weeks ago which talked about the structural funding challenges facing that sector. I think the solutions to those problems are essentially commissioning solutions. We need to find a way of unblocking that problem so we can commission more hospice provision in the future. Perhaps we need to do something to think about how equitable our access is to hip and knee replacements. We've known that's been an issue for a long long time. People living in more deprived areas uh are much less likely than their counterparts living in more affluent areas with similar levels of need to get a hip or knee replacement on the NHS. What might the solutions like that look like? It it might be about trying to find differential payments for providers working uh with individuals from more deprived areas. It might be about introducing outcomesbased contracts in certain ways that might unblock this equity issue. And finally, the biggest problem I think we need to look at is is this issue about delivering the left shift. It's been a policy objective for a long long time. But as many people have pointed out, the drift has been towards the acute sector whilst we've held this policy objective. And again, I can't believe the solutions to this problem lie outside of commissioning. Commissioning needs to find the solutions to these problems. And all of those problems require detailed, well ststructured, well-conducted analyses. Business intelligence isn't really going to help us with these topics, at least not in the short term. Once we work out what our strategy is, then business intelligence can help us track it. But it's not going to find the solutions to these sorts of problems for us. So, I'm going to finish now. I'm just going to get us to think about what it's going to feel like when we're when we're at hacker 2030. Uh, which hopefully will be face to face. Um, maybe ICBS will have grasped this opportunity that's in front of them. I think the key step is to as I said is to separate the management and resourcing of business anal business intelligence and analysis. I think that will give the space for analysis to flourish within the NHS. I know it will be easier to stick with something like the status quo but I suspect that will hold us back and we might regret it. And I know there's lots of uncertainties ahead. Um we're all there's a lot of us thinking about the upcoming restructuring where we'll have a job in the next few months. We don't really know how AI is going to impact on the roles we do. Um, we don't know what the political situation is going to be like in the next few years, even whether there's going to be political support for a taxf funded NHS. Lots of uncertainties, too many to mention, but for the time being, uh, we are active participants in what will emerge, and I'd encourage you to be brave and decisive over this period, particularly if you've got a role to play in structuring the way analysis and business intelligence services are organized within the NHS. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Hi. Thank you very much, Stephen. Uh, there's various things going on backstage. So, you may end up with this Jess style grilling. So, I'm warning you that now. Um, &gt;&gt; so we we grill Jess for some time yesterday while we waited for Mark to be lined up. So, I'm just saying be possibly prepared for that. Uh, see how we go. So, some questions, lots of questions come in. Here's one that I like. uh does poor definition of what is meant by data science further complicate the differentiation between business intelligence and analysis? &gt;&gt; Yeah, you might be better placed to answer that Chris than me. I'll give you my starting view and then you can you can come in Chris. So I think a few years ago um uh data science kind of burst onto the scene and um it came in with its machine learning methods and various other things rap and um kind of shook us up I think in the traditional analytics world in a really helpful way. Um, and it's taken us a while in the strategy unit, I think, to work out how to align some of the more traditional approaches to analysis that we've had with some of the novel approaches of data science. Um, I do think there's a there's a way of combining those two. I think we're finding that way in the strategy unit more and more over the last few um weeks and months uh years. Um and for me data science uh what we really need to take from data science is the how. How how you go about doing things in a reproducible way. Um and uh that the underlying methods that data science brings um are very similar to the underlying methods that were already there within analysis. So a lot of the machine learning stuff um that came with data science I think in the early days we were already kind of doing those stuff so we were just kind of calling it something slightly different but data science improved the way we thought about those methods. Um but I do think from if if if you imagine you're a I don't know a director in an ICB for example these terms business intelligence data science analysis they all kind of roll into one and I do think that's a bit unhelpful. So yeah, I do agree there's potential for confusion there. We've got to work out what the story is ourselves. Um if we're going to help other people understand the distinction between these disciplines. Chris, tell me what you think. &gt;&gt; Uh yeah, sure. Um I think the number one thing reflection for me is that I think data scientists are seen as a jack of all trades. That's my that's my beef with it. They end up doing everything and I've done the same thing myself. building databases, building forecasting algorithms, you know, doing stats, drawing graphs and so on and so on and so on. And nobody has that many skills to a to a deep level. So my team here in the strategy unit work, you know, hand in glove with, you know, obviously your team and other analysts and that for me is let data scientists be data scientists. Don't have them, you know, people just go out and they get one and they just throw stuff at them and just expect them to uh to respond to it. Um, right. Another question. I don't know when we're going to get thrown off stage, but let's just keep going. Uh, do you think ICBS will be able to engage fully in a population health approach given the focus on the day-to-day waiting lists, A&amp;E, 4 hours, etc. that will inevitably distract focus onto a more of the same BI approach? &gt;&gt; Well, um, time will tell. I mean the way the guidance is written at the moment um I think the expectation is that ICBS will be doing much less of that day-to-day stuff delivery management and should be left to get on with take doing the strategic analysis. That's the way the guidance is framed. The guidance recognizes that someone's got to do that strategic commissioning well and that's a full-time job and we should let ICPS get on with that and we should remove some other functions from it which have been to date distracting it from that core task. Whether that's what pans out, we don't know. Um, you know, politicians when things get tricky in the winter of often draw lots of organizations in to responding tactically to the problems in front of it. I think that would be a mistake. I think we need to leave providers and regions to get on with some of that tactical management whilst ICBS get on with the strategic decision- making. That would be my preference. Whether that will turn out to be the case, I don't know. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thanks very much. Well, apparently we are all sorted backstage. Um, there's loads and loads of questions, so uh, people may wish to follow up with you, Stephen, or you could possibly have a look in the Q&amp;A and just drop a few answers in there. Uh, so thank you very much for your contribution. Very interesting. Um.