delighted to introduce our next speakers. Um, so we have Ru Aberatne and George McDonald who are both from the University Hospitals uh, Leester NHS Trust who are going to be talking about emergency department attendances, intersectionality, demography and patient complexity. Ru, I can see you on screen. Um, welcome. I shall hand over to you and apologies. I hope I pronounced your name correctly. &gt;&gt; You're on mute. &gt;&gt; Mute now. &gt;&gt; Yes. &gt;&gt; Everybody. Um I'm not going to lie. George and I have had a bit of a nightmare getting in. So he's on his way. Will join us. But I will start by sharing my screen now. Can you see what I'm sharing? I can't tell if you can see. Aha, perfect. So, um, so my name's Rue. I am consultant geriatrician, uh, by background and I am also director of health equality inclusion at University Hospitals of Leicester. Um, George, who I'm hoping will be joining us shortly, is um, a data engineer and scientist who I've been working with for a few months now. and George and I have been trying to do some work around the intersectionality of our patients thinking about health inequalities, emergency care demand and flow through our emergency department. So I will take you through some of the analysis that we have been doing. Um when I first started this work around health inequalities, we were conditioned to talk about patients in terms of their demographic groups by protected characteristics. So there there are nine protective characteristics but we largely focused on ethnicity, deprivation and age occasionally uh gender. Uh but we know in practice that actually emergency departments and the hospital often focuses on flow and pathways that patients are in. And so how a patient as an individual and their characteristics fits into a flow pathway and how those characteristics might impact a pathway um are integrated and intrinsically linked. Um one of those things is really fixed. So for example the protected characteristics and the other things that is the flow and the demand into our system is much more dynamic in a more dynamic state. What we're trying to do here is work together to understand how protective characteristics, patient demographics impact our patient flows and our operational resilience. Um so it doesn't surprise you I hope to realize that the demand in our system is impacted by inequalities and and in Leicester we've described that as largely our more deprived populations present into our UEC pathways with more frequency and less acuity. Um but actually what we've started to describe is a much less obvious pattern which feeds then into how we plan our services and develop our services. So what we need to be able to to do is to determine upstream of a present presentation what it is that's going to drive health seeking behavior and when the need might arise and how then our ED can respond in a dynamic way to changes in flow. Just to give you some kind of context around our population leester city has a lower than average healthy life expectancy. And when I'm asked to describe the problem we're trying to solve around health inequalities, it is that we need to improve healthy life expectancy particularly for our most disadvantaged colleagues and um communities. Um interestingly though uh the only demographic in Leicester Leester and Rutland within our integrated care system that doesn't have a below average healthy life expectancy are white males who live in the county. So that is Leicester. So we've got a real focus of below average healthy life expectancy. Leester city is one of the most deprived local authorities and I think that's a common statement for lots of systems that I talk to but it is in stark contrast to some of our other local authorities that we serve where in the most recent publications um they were the highest level of um or the lowest deprivation, highest level of affluence. We have a plural city. So there is no ethnic majority in Leicester and the population really shapeshifts because we are a university city. So the city is increasingly youthful. Uh the city is increasingly ethnically diverse and the county is starting to see impacts of that too. Health literacy is a real problem for us and digital exclusion is really variable. So whilst deprivation is a challenge for us in the city, we know that digital inclusion is is a challenge because of literacy rather than tech and access to tech. And then if we think about our hospital and um the service that we offer, University Hospitals of Leicester has one single site emergency department for a population of over 1 million people, well over 1 million people. It's the biggest single site emergency department in Europe. Attendances have grown year on year and to the point now where exceeding a thousand attendances a day is a regular occurrence. We're no longer shocked by that here in Leicester Leester and Rutland. So something needs to be done in terms of linking our population, the dynamics of our population and the behaviors and trends and demand that we are seeing in ED. So I'm going to hand over to George who has appeared. Hopefully George's uh tech is working now, but if not, I'll take over. George, just tell me when you want me to move the screen on. I'm hoping George is going to appear. Okay, I'm going to carry on talking and George comes back to us then uh I will um hand back over. So we've taken a look at over a year's worth of UEC data to try and look at time variation. &gt;&gt; Can George, sorry George, I think you are on Can George, you're on stage, are you not? George, can you talk? Can we hear you? &gt;&gt; Oh, maybe he can't hear us. Can you not hear us, George? Okay. No, I'm sorry. I think we've got some tech issues. Sorry. I thought that was going to work and it So, we'll we'll just we'll move straight. &gt;&gt; I I can hear George. Uh George, I'll I'll carry on and if um George can chip in, then do so. Um so, hopefully you've had time to have a look at the uh slides. So, these are the demographics that we looked at. um ethnicity, deprivation, age, and we were really keen to pick out acuity and frailty and how that's impacting demand. And we've looked at both our admitted and nonadmitted pathways. So I will take you through some of the results. Um so if we talk about adult attendances first. So what we can see here is that by ethnicity and within the age category 50 to 69 you can see a clear hotspot of focus of activity but when we take a look at the same age brackets by ethnicity it's really interesting to see that the hotspot activi of activity persists for the age bracket but when you start to look at deprivation you can see that younger patients start to pitch up more to our ED from more deprived communities than from less deprived communities. When we look at pediatric attendances, we have a similar kind of um pattern but in a younger group of patients. So the demand is greater for our younger groups of patients compared to our older groups of pediatric patients. But actually as you start to look at deprivation, it's age that's driving it rather than deprivation being the factor as compared to the adult attendances. I am canering through these because I'm aware of the tech issues having slowed us down a little bit. So hopefully what this slide can summarize for you is what you've seen in those two heat maps. So attendances are concentrated in age ethnicity brackets rather than age deprivation brackets. And what we've found is that most of our demand in adults comes from white 59 to 69 50 to 69 year olds. And actually if we disagregate that further, it's much more skewed towards older patients. And in pediatrics, white ethnicity patients are dominant but in a younger cohort um rather than by deprivation. What I would what I really must caveat this with is that whilst Leicester City is a plural city with no ethnic majority, the county has a a white majority population. I think that's really important for us to remember and understand data. So um so this is just a reference to the fact that the what we're seeing in our results isn't necessarily rep representative in the city of our population data. So the that reference to a plural city um and high levels of deprivation. Um when we've taken a look and tried to overlay clinical information into this data analysis, what we've seen is that white populations generally are presenting to us with a higher acuity. And the way we've looked at acuity is through early warning scores, but also um DPS scores, so dynamic priority scores. Um George, feel free to come off microphone if you can hear me and try and chip in because if I can hear you talking, I'll hand over to you. Yeah, I think is everything working now. &gt;&gt; Sorry everybody if anyone's watching this. Um, okay. So, so do you want me to carry on or &gt;&gt; Yes, please. &gt;&gt; Cool. So, the key takeaways from um sort of the heat maps that have just been shown that we've got deep demographic intersectionality. So, white patients are also older. I'm saying is that so these ethnicity effects in other patient outcomes we look at might actually just be age effects. Um and then with among theatrics we're seeing the majority of uh focused on very on the very young with a more even spread across levels of deprivation. And then I think finally it's really key to highlight that point that Ruth's been talking about. We often assume that higher tendency group reflects overuse. Actually we're kind of seeing the opposite here. Um population and presentation accusing the next one. Sorry. So now I'm going to turn and look at weight times. Uh these are simple pulled OS regressions. Um so we're checking all data in from those 22 months and we're looking at the differences in weight times between the different ethnic groups. These are as I said these are M&amp;S groupings. What we're seeing somewhat surprisingly um whether we look at binary or continuous outcomes uh is that uh white patients are waiting longer and those relationships are statistically significant. And also I think the other thing to highlight here is that the raw result or the unadjusted result is really quite large. When we add in a control for age, we're seeing that that coefficient to decrease, but not to the point of statistical significance. So, we've got big differences between Asian and white populations and black and black British and white populations just to highlight there. Okay, next slide, please. Thanks. So, what what we're going to do now is we're going to try and decompose that ethnicity gap that we've just seen and look particularly at the white and the Asian groups. What we're seeing is we're seeing and we're going to standardize um the waiting time gap just because the fact that um admitted patients generally wait longer than non-admitted. What we're seeing is that admitted the gap in the admitted population is much larger than the non-admitted um and um so that's a sort of 2 standard deviations relative to around 1.0.17. So not massive but there is a difference there. Next slide please. Um so but then we can actually decompose that and ask okay well how much of that ethnicity gap in each of those subsamples is due to clinical or or case mix or explained factors. So our age, acuitities, our frailty, our arrivals, all the things which are decided before someone arrives at um at ED. And what we see is that by some by some amount uh in the admitted population a bigger degree to a larger extent um the uh the gap is explained by those case mix those things that are decided beforehand in the community if you like uh than in the non-admitted population. So there is more uh and what we can do from this is infer that there's probably in the admitted population there is less that we can do to operationally in terms of tweaking uh operational flows and things like that that are actually going to impact uh the ethnicity gap here. Okay, next slide please. So then we're going to flip to deprivation and these results aren't so large. what we're seeing is uh well the unadjusted results are quite large and quite surprising but then when we add in a age once again we see those signs actually flip um so there becomes that so there's a slight um uh there so there's a slight deprivation gap emerging between so our reference group here is the the least deprived and we're showing the first quintiles the second quintile and fourth and what we're seeing is that until we add in arrival hour for the most part we're having seeing some sort of deprivation gap between our most uh deprived and our least deprived. Uh once we add an arrival hour, it's really interesting most of those uh relationships fade to insignificant. Um so again uh what we're seeing here is a big role for case and things which are decided before anyone's even set foot in the ED. Uh sorry, next slide please. Uh but actually once again when we split that sample that split our patients between admitted and non-admitted patients actually what we're seeing is that uh the differences um uh is we're seeing in the admitted this is the admitted population we're seeing that there are meaningful differences. Uh and we're seeing that once we add in age we get a big change but as has been the case all the way through but actually very little purchase from adding frailty acuity uh and arrival hour. So there is a big difference in the emitter population but not so much in the normal emitter. Next slide please. Uh and then to do the sim the similar exercise to to before that we did with ethnicity by by a much smaller magnitude here we're seeing that that gap in the admitted population is slightly larger than the non-admitted population that that deprivation gap. Next slide please. Um but what interestingly what we're seeing here is that uh that uh the admitted uh that this gap is quite modest as we know um and we're seeing a similar trend again in the admitted population. we've got a group uh we can explain much of these uh deprivation gaps through case my mix or things which are decided before people reach ED and actually uh while and there's very little scope for changing ED operational behaviors which will then influence deprivation gaps in the non-admitted population we have a bigger percentage of things which are unexplained by these case mix or upstream uh different uh differences and so there's a bigger role for ED operation uh behavior to change um uh to change um uh to change these deprivation gaps. Um okay, next slide. Uh okay, this I'll see if I've got time for this actually. So, uh I'm not going to include this. I'm going to skip past this. This is a little bit of a thought experiment. You know, is this just about admission? Um but I think it's more important that we get on to uh so Ru can talk a little bit about um how this is impacting our work. Um so again this this is just uh from an action so the takeaway from all of this work from us from doing these decomposition exercises is that from an actionoriented point of view therefore admitted pathways even though they're admitted pathways even though they offer the space where the gaps are greatest between ethnicities and deprivation they're they actually from a secondary care perspective offer the lowest potential to change uh these these gaps. So if we want to change things up for admitted patients, we have to go out into the community um which R is now going to talk a bit. &gt;&gt; Thank you George. We got there in the end. Um so uh just in terms of summarizing uh and leaving time for questions. I'm really keen that we have some time for questions. I'm going to draw your attention to the bottom of the screen. So uh a huge amount of the conversation at the moment if I think about this from a secondary care perspective, from an inequalities perspective, from a broader NHS perspective is where do we need to focus the very limited resource we have for to have the most impact for patients. UC's are under huge amounts of pressure at the moment. And actually what this piece of work has helpfully helped us to disagregate, delineate and understand is that the work we need to do is to focus upstream of the presentation. There's always work to do in our EDS and in our UEC pathways around productivity and efficiency. But if we're talking about intervening in the patient process, in the patient pathway, we need to take our interventions upstream outside of the ED before people present to us. And so in that tells me that in terms of how we inform our integrated neighborhood approaches, the data underpinning demand is so very important. So we went into this work with some preconceptions with some expectations and we've been challenged by by those but it's also really helped us to have conversations with partners with system colleagues and to start thinking differently about how we manage the demand challenge within our UEC pathway. We know we've got an admitted pathway with a huge amount of demand in it. And there's something about how we recognize the difference in that demand as being medically driven perhaps more so than the non-admitted pathway. It sounds obvious when you say it, but actually helping us to then determine how you build an integrated neighborhood offer around health for patients who need to come into the hospital is different for patients than for patients who don't end up needing to come into the hospital. So thinking about how we use our medical model of care and our social models of care and how we deploy those in different ways for different populations. Um I'm going to stop now because I'd really like to be able to take some questions uh and have a conversation and I'm also really happy to share given the tech problems we had anything uh that people are interested in as well. Thank you, Ru and George, and and that was a fascinating presentation and thank you for coping so well with the tech problems and apologies uh for for for that. um that there we're probably not going to have time for all of the questions, but actually I'm gonna sort of the one that I'm gonna pick on is just hopefully George will give you a bit of an opportunity to talk about the bit that you skipped over because there's a question from Nora about really interesting the explained and unexplained case mix components in the inequalities group and just asking if you can expand on that. Um the sort of particularly the analytical aspect of that. Yeah, of course. So, u yeah, happy to chat about this via email or afterwards, but this is a what we call um so yeah, so this is what we call a wacka blind regression or decomposition. And what we're essentially doing is we're taking the coefficients that we saw in that initial regression exercise and asking how much is explained by our data mix. So our acuity, I saw another question in the chat about that. We're measuring that both we we tried with um EWS so high EWS or uh but also with um dynamic priority scoring the results are robust to that and then frailty scores so whether above a five or seven and then um arrival hours. So that's what we're so that's how we're characterizing our explained component of this. It's uh it's probably incomplete. There's probably more we could add to it. Um, and then unexplained is just everything that we can't necessarily that isn't dealt with before someone reaches the front door or isn't. Um, the methodology is pretty involved. Um, probably don't have time to touch on that in 3 minutes. I know that's a weak excuse. Um, but um, but yeah, really happy to chat about it. Um, it has its sort of grounding in um, uh, sort of um, in labor economics and uh, different sources of inequality. uh there but so that's where it comes from but yeah happy to talk more about that. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. It's it's it's obviously generated a lot of interest. There's lots of questions about whether the source code uh is sharable and and also whether there's a report um and if who wants to respond to that. &gt;&gt; No report just yet but really hoping to get it get it. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thank you. Um, there's also a question about how well the ethnicity data was populated. I know that's a bit of a can be a bit of a challenge. So, I don't know if you can comment on that. &gt;&gt; I'll let George answer in terms of this project and then I can answer on behalf of the trust more broadly. &gt;&gt; Um, I think I think you can probably answer better for us. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, so, uh, given also that there's been some NHS England kind of mandate and guidance around ethnicity coding, we've we've reviewed our ethnicity coding and from what we can see, it's well captured. So, it's well documented, but we I think we recognize that. So, what George described as the OS ons ethnicity coding. Um, our EPR doesn't necessarily code by the ONS categories only. And so there is work for us to do around matching up what we have on our internal system with what we are reporting whether it's here or in another forum. And we also know that um it really varies from community group to community group, from patient to patient dayto day. You can ask people on one day they'll report one ethnicity coding depending on what's in front of them and then you ask another day and it changes. So there's always a degree of variability with ethnicity coding. All I can really say, and George feel free to disagree, is that the data that we have felt like it was reasonably complete, but we recognize that there is potential in there for subjectivity as well. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, yeah, I've just seen a question in the chat about frailty. That's our big I think the big issue really. Um, I think we're fairly confident across the board from some of the uh missing uh data quality checks I did going into it that that was quite high. But I definitely felt like for something we're missing and I know as a trust we're kind of looking to improve that. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Just Yeah. So the coding element of this piece of work is a is a recognized caveat to some of the work but in pursuit of perfection not doing the work felt like the wrong thing to do. So I think we we've gone with what we've got and I think the areas are for improvement rather than not doing it in the first place. And I'm going to use chair's prerogative and just take the last question that's appeared in the chat about what your next steps for this piece of work because it's a really interesting um piece of work but clearly got lots of potential. So just where do you where do you go next with it? Um so from a kind of trust perspective what we're trying to do is overlay this piece of work with the integrated neighborhood team working. So how does this work inform how we develop our particularly our city integrated neighborhood teams but also there's George has been doing some other work around kind of demand and and on the day but how does that fit into in dayto-day operational management of patient flows um I think the point the real take-home point for me around this is the population health aspect of how we predict and manage our demand and respond to our demand. Um, so maybe in 12 months time we can come back and share an update on where we've got to, but it it does feel like we're a bit of a juncture of this could go in multiple directions. There's only one of George and one of me, so we have to pick and choose based on patient need really and where we need to do have most impact. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. I'm I'm sure there'll be interest in you coming back in 12 months to to update and