Yes. Okay. So, that's point. So, so seamlessly, I think I'm going to move on somehow to try to uh to introduce you, Sally. Not to try to to introduce you. So, Sally Gainsbury um senior policy analyst at the Northfield Trust. Um certainly one of one of the strategy unit's favorite authors. We we love what you produce, Sally. It's a it's a much needed um counter to a lot that's out there. Um anyway, I came across the other day, I didn't I hadn't read this before, but um Arthur Conan Doyle in 1891 put these put these words into the mouths of Sherlock Holmes. So So they must be right. It's Sherlock. So Sherlock said it is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories instead of theories to suit facts. 135 years later after Sherlock said that um we've invited Sally to um to run through a few instances where maybe where maybe we need to listen to Sherlock Holmes's um dictim a bit more carefully. So over to you Sally. &gt;&gt; Thank you Peter. Um that's a really kind introduction and thank you for having me. Um, I've got to admit I'm quite nervous at speaking to um so many analysts. Um, so thanks for putting up for me. Can is my is my screen being successfully shared? There should be a PowerPoint slide. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Is that the slideshow version? &gt;&gt; I'm sorry everybody. I um &gt;&gt; That's okay. Do you want to just hide the toolbar and um hopefully that &gt;&gt; people can see I can I can see it in um is that is that not coming into presenter mode? &gt;&gt; I mean we're seeing the PowerPoint version. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. Um right that that's all that I can Yeah. I am Yeah. Anyway, okay everybody big apologies. Um so yes um before I started working at Nfield Trust I um used to be a journalist and despite spending 10 years at Nfield Trust I'm still more comfortable asking questions than I am answering them but luckily I was asked today to come and talk about some questions that um we might have and that might be interesting to explore about current health policy. And so I wanted to talk about three big accepted truths that are quite central to health policy at the moment. but probably need some unpicking going forward and um hopefully some of them um will form some sort of rich pickings for analysts and the one I want to focus on is the one that is the central plank of the government's policy at the moment which is to um shift health care fromos acute hospitals and into communities um which is a vaguely defined notion that can involve GP practices, community health centers and obviously people's homes. and um yeah and this and that's been articulated most recently in the government's tenure plan for the NHS but al also has formed a large part of health policy over the last um three decades if not more um right so what are the big accepted truths that the that policy makers kind of believe in terms of um shifting care from hospital to home so there's three main me three main patient centers ones and that's that um care close to home is convenient, more convenient for patients, particularly for the growing numbers of people with long multiple long-term conditions, you know, to avoid them having to make multiple separate trips to hospital appointments, for example. But also that's more convenient to younger populations who are perhaps more used to this in the government's perception. They're more used to ondemand services, the click of a button um and on demand consumption. And then there's also um the biggest accepted truth that care close to home will be able to be more preemptive and therefore avoid future health. We'll just you through preemptive um health care will um will will slow the rate of disease progression or or stop it altogether. Um so we'll avoid ill health in the future and also it'll be we'll be able to manage people's longterm conditions better to avoid acute exas exasperations. And then the third big accepted truth in terms of the patient centered element of this is that it would be more appropriate. Um so avoiding emergency admissions for example through urgent community response teams um for example after a f frail elderly person has had a fall so to avoid having to convey them to hospital. um earlier discharge from hospital um and also more realistic care particularly um towards the end of life. Although this element of what what realistic care is possibly the least explored um the the least explored of these assumptions. Um possibly because it's particularly hard to sell a lower level of care if what the political offer is a sort of a consumer offer to the patients and public. Okay. Um so moving to the next slide and an another another reason which perhaps less patient centered but is certainly at the forefront of the government's mind is the financial reason and an assumption that um care close to home will be cheaper and the reason the government um is making that assumption of the reasons particularly interested in vested in the assumption um being correct is the blue line here is showing you actual health spending in England over the last 15 years in real terms. And the red dotted line is showing you what spending would have been since 2011 had it increased with a long-term trend over the first 60 years of the NHS. And the gap between those two numbers you can see is 37 billion. So what we're showing is that spending now on health in in health terms is is rising pretty much in line with the last 15 years, which is about 2.5% real terms on average. and we're left with this 37 billion pound gap in terms of what the health service has been used to um receiving in order to be able to serve the health needs and demands of of its of um the UK. Okay. Um so a big hope um in terms of being able to for that to be manageable and not lead to um rising levels of patient public satisfaction which is unfortunately what we do see around the NHS at the moment is that um that um the shift from out of hospital into the community can kind of reduce the level of um health care consumption even yeah reduce overall terms of healthare use that we have and reduce the unit costs of of of healthare to sort of fill that 37 billion gap or or to make the gap disappear as it were. Um now there's a lot of uncertainties in a lot of this. Um so the first uncertainty that I think is um worth exploring around the big accepted truths is whether or not the shift to preemptive care will actually lead to a net reduction or a net increase in health care intervention and consumption. So part of the problem there or part of the part of the area that we'd want to question is if some hospital facilities and staff staff are shifted into non-host settings for example diagnostic and elective procedures um and outpatient appointments happening in um community centers um community health centers some of that is still going to need to stay in hospitals. So how much duplication are we going to end up having? And the another issue is um if there is duplication, supply induced demand is a real factor in healthcare. Economists um prove it again and again. Um if we build healthcare facilities, people tend to want to use them. So the the issue around um potential duplication could lead to to to further levels of intervention. And back again also to that the chart I showed you earlier and I've I've sneakily added an additional line to that chart now which is the green dashed line at the bottom and that shows you what health care spending would have increased by since 2011 if our level of health care consumption this is expressed in financial terms increased only in line with um the aging population. So i.e. if um the um age related consumption stays static. And so we we we'd see it increase because we've got growing numbers of over 70 year olds who um in general consume more health care than younger populations. Um but as we can see the actual healthcare budget this year is 31 billion pounds more than it would be had health care consumption just stayed um static um and and rose mill in line with um what we'd expect given ch the change in age structure of society. So we don't have a great understanding of why I mean this is very normal by the way we see it across compar comparable countries um but generally we see healthcare um consumption or demand rising at least twice as fast as we'd expect given um changing demographics. We don't have a great understanding of why that is and um what the separate components of that are. Um a small amount of it might be um higher levels of disease as um people get live longer and they acquire more disease that then requires treatment. But a significant element is also likely to be technological advance and the associated rising expectations that come with that. So we we diagnose more, we find new things to treat, we live a bit longer, we have but with more disease and and you know we we expect to be able to receive the new treatments that that um that are are discovered. So the point of this is to um to illustrate that our track record in reducing demand for care is not great. Um and our hosts um today the health foundation and the stress unit did some really interesting work a few years ago trying to explore this issue a bit further. I've I've I've selected um some elements of of that analysis here where they looked at activity rates for um across multiple forms of health care um and they they compared um the actual rate of activity growth um over about 15 years in the leadup to the pandemic which is shown in the blue bars and they compared that to what they'd expect that those forms of health care given um changing in the um change in the age structure of the population. And as you can see, the the the largest growth was in elective procedures with an average annual growth rate of 9.6% in the period they looked at compared to an expected growth rate of around about 1% if if elected procedures have simply risen in line with demographics. Um that there was we saw this across um emergency admissions as well, but it's interesting to note that it was much more modest um gap between expected and actual growth and emergency admissions. So actual growth for emergency admissions around 1.9% whereas expected would be just under 1%. So this again raises the question will access to um will making access to diagnostics easier and more convenient reduce or increase demand and expectation for future healthcare interventions. Okay. So the next big accepted truth is that the public actually want care closer to home and or the public actually want a lower level of intervention. So this this rests on the assumption that care closer to home is more convenient and there's a huge potential for people interested in mixed methods research combining quantum qual approaches here to really get under the bonnet of of what the public think and feel about um healthcare and um where they want to access it and and why. Now, the government did explore some of that as part of the public engagement around the 10-year plan, but it's interesting to note that they haven't actually published that work yet. Um, so we've already noted the role of rising expectations. New treatments and diagnosis have become available. So, we want them. And this respect I thought I found a really interesting exchange in the pages of the BMJ recently. So the quote at the top is from an article written by an emergency care doctor and he was writing about the increased risk adversity um in hospitals in A&amp;E departments that lead patients and institutions to expect ever more testing and defensive approaches to medicine. Um you so he talked about a patient who 10 years ago um you wouldn't even um have sent for one particular unpronouncable test but now they'll they'll have multiple just to be safe. Um what was interesting about that that um that piece is that they'll send um a a raft of comments including from GPS who basically said yeah same here in fact we we've been experiencing this possibly for longer and the bit I highlighted at the bottom was a a GP remark having tests is now a wellestablished part of human illness behavior. GPS talk about, you know, how patients, you know, they they don't really feel satisfied if you if if um they you ask them to go go home and wait and see um what what they really expect and what they feel is um a positive experience in primary care is often to come away with a prescription or a referral for another test. Now, we could say this is all fine because, you know, the tests themsel this doesn't undermine the assumption that patients want care closer to home. um surely they'd like to have the CT scans, the MRIs um closer to home. It' be more convenient. So, it's not a challenge to that that to that accepted um truth. Um but if but if care to care close to home is also supposed to be about reducing rates of medical intervention, it might be correct to query the public's current appetite for that. At the moment, we're pretty keen at least on um on diagnostic tests. And we also don't understand well enough why patients and clinicians to some extent find these currently largely hospital-based interventions reassuring. So what role does the actual hospital building and the presence of highly qualified medical staff play in that? And can that that that in any way be replicated in the community based care model. Um we we do need those highly qualified medical staff to stay in hospitals. Well, certainly a significant number of them, by the way, in order to um you we're not considering actually shutting down hospital services. So, I think there's a a real question about um the assumption um there about um the appropriate use of um what what the public might might feel is is appropriate to shift out of hospitals. Another question about what whether or not the p um public actually wants care closer to home is an interesting generational question about demand of hospital care. So the highest consumers of acute care are people in the 75 to 79 age band who are now for the first time a co cohort of older people who were literally born into the NHS. And so how this will affect their expectations and level of level of model of care they expect to receive um is an interesting and underexplored um question. And finally um of of our big big accepted truths um we have the uncertainty around more appropriate care. So the generational point leads us to question um whether patients and their families will actually accept some of the assumptions built into the notion of care closer to home being more appropriate. So facilitating earlier discharge of course sounds great if the unpaired carers are around to provide care but it might also be perceived by patients and their family as a higher risk model. Um you know doctors and nurses aren't necessarily going to be on call immediately um um in hospital at home for example whereas on a hospital ward there's a perception that they are and ditto regards to avoided emergency admission. So a lot of um ICBS around the country are interested in boosting um their urgent community response teams um in order to avoid um um um frail elderly communities in particular being conveyed to hospital after a fall or um an infection for example in a care home. But again um will patients and their families and their their wider carers accept um them not being taken into hospital um when that's been the model for the last you know 80 odd years. Um it's interesting to note this regard the um health foundation and stress unit analysis that I highlighted earlier which suggested that in terms of where the where the gap is between um the actual levels of activity and what we'd expect given um the age structure of the population emergency admissions perhaps aren't um where the kind of the big where where the biggest gap is um between expected and actual growth. So, you know, it's it it's it's um it's it's warranted to question how how much how much room for really reducing the level of demand for emergency admission there might be. And then we've had the discussion about realistic care, or rather we haven't had the discussion about realistic care. In fact, it's not actually mentioned in the 10-year plan, but it was highlighted in the chief medical officers um report in 2023. So realistic care is about you know um whe you know partic is is particularly a conversation that centers around people in towards the end of their life about when to move from a sort of a curative pathway to perhaps um one that's about um maintaining um what's important to them um for them to be able to um you know live out the the rest of their their their um months and years with the highest quality of of life rather than the the longest um amounts of life um lifetime. Um but a a a particular problem with that is is that a large number of people who are perhaps in their last year of life of course don't know that that they are in their last year of life and don't recognize it partly because we don't have a a good way of discussing this as a society. um really interesting analysis oh that I have managed not to include here um from um my um some of my colleagues at Nathfield Trust of the changes um in health care people received in the last month their life um between 2019 and 2023 found that people whose cause of death was reported as cancer on average received 1.7 outpatient appointments in the last month of their life in 2023 compared to 1.2 in in 2019. Now we don't know what those outpatients appointments were for in not all of them will have been for chemotherapy cancer was the cause of death not the not the cause of that that those um final um interactions with um with the health care system but it's likely that some of those outpatient appointments would have been um cancer specific. Now was it a tragedy for those people that they spent their final days in outpatient appointments or was that did they feel that was appropriate and a way for them to hold out hope until the end? Um now the the silver bullet generally on um more um on realistic care is often um thought to be um shared decisionm um which would enable um people to have conversations about what matters to them and to realistically think about the impact of a healthcare intervention on their quality of life particularly when that life might not be they might not have um very many months or years left of that life. But an an important and under underexplored question around um shared decision-making and realistic care is that what's realistic for some in terms of the level of support and the home environment um they they might be able to expect following a procedure or a treatment is obviously um differs um within the population and there are really stark inequalities around the level of support um some people can expect to receive following for example an orthopedic um procedure. and um what what others um can realistically expect which would be a much lower level of support and I think this is a a a really interesting area that's worthy of um of of of further investigation. Um and that is um all I wanted to set out today. Sorry, I might have rushed through that cuz I was worried that I had um too much um to to go on. But um we can um I can we can have um some questions if that is of interest to people. I got to find where you are now. &gt;&gt; That's it. I'm on. Can you hear me? &gt;&gt; Yeah, I can. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Thank you for that, S. Thank you. Um, there are a couple of qu we we need as as the conference goes on, people are going to learn that if they put the their questions in the Q&amp;A thing rather than in the chat. It creates an opportunity for their questions to be voted on and the surface thing and I'm sure this will go. But anyway, as it starts, we've got um got a couple of questions which I'll I'll try and do do justice to. Um but but but maybe could I just start with one which is that from these three areas that you've highlighted um what would you think would be some of the key lines of inquiry some of the key kind of analytical questions where you think if we could do some work on those things it might advance our understanding around the issues that you raised. I I I I think one would be further investigation of the the components of this kind of if we could call it excess demand above the the demographic um expectation. Um it would be really interesting to see come sort of how yeah when it's obviously work that people have attempted um multiple times. Um so coming up with a um a yeah a a model or a a sort of perhaps either um quite a a a a micro um analysis looking at one particular um health economy might be an interesting approach to really sort of be able to understand how those um different you know sort of non-demographic pressures break down where you you've obviously did that very interesting work looking at different levels of services um but um you to be able to understand sort of the cost components of that to sort of cost breakdown would be interesting. And the other thing that I'm really interested in is this um uh question of um the expectations of today's 75 to 79 year olds partly because that's that's um that that's the age bracket that my parents are in. So it feels you know very very relevant to me sort of I'm I'm living that kind of um baby boomer um yeah health care needs and healthcare expectations reality. Um but I think that in the past we've made certain assumptions about what um elderly populations expect. Um and um I think the baby boomers have often proven prior assumptions to be wrong about them. &gt;&gt; Um I learned a big lesson about some of these factors that that can create that kind of demand when I was young commissioning opthalmology services. We had real problems. The waiting list went crazy and I was talking to some orthmologists and they said, "Well, when people had cataracts, we used to do one eye and recently we've decided do both is better." It suddenly struck me that was like double development, which uh but who's going to argue we should go back to one eye? Well, maybe there is a case for it. Okay. The the question that um uh the upper voted question uh that I now can't see on the screen actually it's moved but but I but it was essentially saying we we've currently got a kind of dynamic where perhaps people where people revert to the bit of the system they conceive of as being most available or or most technically capable or whatever. But but the person but the question is saying do we think that dynamic might change or is there any evidence around whether we think that dynamic might change if if we were able to organize things so people could get more than a 10-minute consultation in primary care. &gt;&gt; Yeah interesting question hard to know how it could be explored. I mean it is is perhaps the most evidence got on that around the 4hour A&amp;E target where when A&amp;E waiting was substantially reduced people then well the thesis was people then wanted to make more use it became yeah very convenient to use the A&amp;E rather than have to book a GP appointment. I mean, I think the kind um that there was some sort of mixed evidence in terms of what was the driver there, but um where's I I I I'm I'm curious to know where the the kind of the live experiment in um GPS having more time for example um do we have uh much um data to explore on on that? Probably probably not. There is data that tells us if we can organize things so that people the people who most benefit from it can get continuity of care. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Then that will c you know there's pretty strong evidence now that that increased continuity of care will reduce demand for urgent care. And yet the way we've organ done a lot of things in recent times have acted to reduce continuity of care because we we've preferred access to continuity. So so there is a there is a there is a thing to work on that &gt;&gt; and it looks like that trajectory is probably you going to be strengthened with the idea of um large community health centers &gt;&gt; instead of a continuity. There's definitely an area of potential unintended consequence. Um territory. Um it's critical that we do proper evaluation. I think um celebrate case studies of capital. Um there was another question that was in there that was about um the the kind of how do we assess the balance between widespread testing and early identification of the overall better improved economics of service. You is there any evidence to suggest we could get a better result if we could do more of that kind of Sorry, you broke up a little bit, [clears throat] but evidence on you um expansion of non-symptomatic um testing and screening. [gasps] I mean, I think we have to this this is one of the the the the big assumptions that um you the more preemptive testing and screening and sort of genomic mapping of the population will um lead to a low lower healthcare demand in the future because we'll spot disease early and we'll be able to stop it or reverse it. Um that's that's an assumption and it hasn't been tested and I think it's you needs to we need huge caution on this because you know the risk of driving up demand and diverting resources away from patients who need those resources more um is yeah is is a real risk and a and a real concern. you we we we have we we have got methods for you testing um oh sorry for for testing assumptions and and and modeling um the impact and the cost effectiveness of of screening programs and I hope we won't leave those behind. I mean it is I mean it is worth mentioning that you know there is you know a strong commercial interest in um expanding testing um and screening. I mean it's you know it's a it's a growth area um in terms of the economy. So you know um and you with the we had news this week around you know the government um agreeing to increase expenditure um on new branded medicines and I I think we do have to be live to that sort of temptation and pull for the government to um to sort of reshape the health service to in in part to to suit the life sciences interests. Um, but we need to keep public, you know, public health and and patient interests at the heart of what the NHS does, not reshape it for those commercial interests, I think. &gt;&gt; Great. Sally, your time's up, but but but thank thank you for for keeping on provoking us to think about our fundamental assumptions. It's a it's a vital role. It's frustrating that sometimes you don't get invited to parties because you're the person who raises their you. But but one doesn't get invited to parties if one sometimes puts the the inconvenient truths but but but hopefully we can move into a world where the inconvenient truths are embraced and we all start to think you know what does the evidence actually tell us and how do we how do we drive forward in the most effective way and analysts can play a great part in that. So, thank you so much for your time. Um, and uh, and please stay with us for the rest of the concert if you've got if you got time.