Got Matt online now. Hang on. Yes, there he is. Over to you, Matt. &gt;&gt; Is it present for you now? Sorry, Emma. &gt;&gt; Perfect. No, no worries. &gt;&gt; Okay, wonderful. Thank you so much. And thanks, thanks everyone for the opportunity to um to share uh this this this project. Um so, just um for a bit of context, um this is um just about to kick off. at the very early stages um of this um project. So what I'd really like to do is spend a few minutes just sharing the um the sort of vision and approach that we um that we have for it. Um so the the project is called care data spaces. Um and um I'm going to be presenting today on behalf of my colleagues at West Midlands ADAS, but this is very much a collaborative and co-designed um uh project. Um, as um, you've already heard, I'm based at the University of Birmingham and also the ESRC um, center for care and this is a project um that has been funded via the um, via the ESRC um, and agreed with colleagues at the the Center for Care as well and um, for I'm sure everyone knows um, colleagues on this um, on this screen but this is um, Pete Jackson, Paul Johnson and Caroline Volu um, who've been really fundamental in the um, um, in in the work that we've that we've done and the the the strategic approach. Um so just to give you a really quick overview, um this the central um the central question or the central motivation is can we create a data system that allows people to understand and improve social care support and and well-being outcomes. Um and we're really interested to know if we can also make this um system a sustainable part of the the national infrastructure something that um colleagues in practice and people with lived experience are using um every day um as part of uh business as usual model. So this is um the the other key feature is that we really want this to be part sort of operational research and and learning um endeavor. So using routine data as part of business and useful uh business as usual models to inform um practice um to improve decision making um to understand um insights and I think if we could sort of boil everything down to two main aims. The first aim is to um is to really in inform national insights using mandated aggregated data and linking that information to census information and other geographical um information. Um and then the second um piece is around client level um data. Uh so working closely particularly in the West Midlands, the 14 local authorities um that we have there with their client level record analysis and linkage to other um other um uh uh uh administrative records. Um as well we also want to be able to create digital tools and technologies um that resolve challenges around adult social care. and we want to embed in learning and improvement into the process of delivering care um as well. Um so for those of you who might be a little less familiar with the adult social care um context um it's one that's um where there's increasing pressure to use data intelligently and effectively. Um people often describe it as being more poorly um served by quantitative or numerical data and ways of analyzing it compared to other um sectors such as health or education. Um, for example, when we talked to people um about um the the work that we wanted to do, um they often said that um it was difficult to know where to begin with with data. Um how to balance competing priorities that emerge from um from the data, but also in terms of their um their their practice and the things that they're doing as in in the in their daily roles. um how to ensure balanced and impactful development and how to find time and resource to better understand and learn from the data. So the result um when you when you bring all that together is that there are limited insights into adult social care, limited knowledge of what works best for whom and in what circumstances and reduced ability to develop data skills and and to learn as as part of roles. Um, so the five main things, and I'm going to be showing a schematic in a second that brings all all this together, is we really wanted to to um co-design and co-produce this piece of work. That's that's fundamental. That's that's central to everything. Um [snorts] so can we create a digital learning system with a community of practice with a lived experience panel with people who are um uh working in practice um every day to you know understand how the system can be beneficial um for them and for the priorities that they have and the ways of working that they um that they have. Um with that we want to then develop a data infrastructure and analytical service um to understand adult social care. So understanding intersectional inequalities, informing practice change for local authorities, um using aggregated um data and census information and geographical um data as well. And I think most importantly the the key thing is that we are creating resource and capacity to do that analytical work on behalf of um colleagues uh in in practice if that's something that they would find beneficial. This isn't necessarily a system that we're setting up and uh um letting be for for people to use which which you can do. Um but we would we really want to be part and embedded in that process to provide that resource to be able to um provide um insights um for colleagues. We also want to understand how we can develop a safe and ethical and reproducible process for preparation analysis of client level data that captures individual um care journeys and people's uh live lived live lived experience. Um we want to work across academic and practice boundaries to understand what works and how the data can be used to inform routting practice and learning support in adult social care and the implementation and evaluation of the of the data system. And so this is a schematic that that brings all this together. Um um where we have a work package around um building the community of practice, the care data spaces, the client level data um using those pieces of information to create um impact case studies so that people um short two-page um insight reports for example that describe a priority area um for the colleagues in practice who've informed um that that analysis. And then um number five is just the implementation and evaluation um process. Um so in terms of um the the building the the community of practice and experience um we will as I've said we will co-produce the system um setting the that that um that um uh community of practice will really set the agenda the research questions the priorities that we have. So we want to really give up power um and enable them to uh to set the agenda and what it is that we are um that we are doing with this um ensure that outputs therefore meet the sector needs and a sustainable um post project. Um and hopefully this is um a longer a longer term sustainable piece of work as well. um the community of practice and experience will focus on the lives that people want to to lead and that there's um choice and control in the way that um in the thing that people are um that people experience. Um when we want to work with people who have experience in social care along with commissioners, practitioners, policy makers to develop this this um digital learning tool um to inform daily practice. As I mentioned um the the main um piece that we're talking about today is the care databases. is how we bring that aggregated mandated uh data together, the census information, the geographical information into one place uh to inform decision making and improve understandings of intersection inequalities and and need um create this virtual data space and a and a dashboard for interactive mapping and analytics. Um insights and analyses will be upscale and automated and replicated. So the one of the things that we're really excited um about is that once we have the priority a few priority areas from um a dozen local authorities, we can automate those um priorities across those local authorities, but also upscale that um nationally. Um uh so that that's something that we're that we're hoping to do. So it's not just something that the community of practice and experience benefit from, but it's something that we can um roll out and upscale. Um as well we're also going to follow the open science framework. So all of our files and code and analyses will be publicly available and will be publicly available in um local authority um files um and we also want to create learning resources around this. So while we are proposing to um to act as the the analytics team um to to build the system in in different ways but also to provide the the [snorts] analytical insights. We also do want to create those um resources where um colleagues um will be able to um to do those things for themselves independently. Um so this all builds on the strategic framework um of of of ADAS um um which is um which is available on their on on their website. So which creates an analytical capability um roadmap and lots of colleagues will already know that they have this wonderful data hub um that's already um that that that already um exists. And so this has brought um this this is a really accessible tool that people can access and can um look at their local areas and understand a whole range of um things in relation to um to adult social care. So things um uh like assurance metrics, care market profiles, uh finance profiles, population in need, um performance metrics and workforce profiles. So the idea is that we'll be able to combine this with other census information, other um other publicly available um information to really understand um how things have changed over time and place, but also um longer term use for uh forecasting and providing um insights moving forward about what will um what will happen and what's what's needed in the future. Um just as an aside um uh we also have created a number of dashboards and other topic areas as well which we are um proposing um to use as well. So this is the unpaid care dashboard um that we have developed at the um at the center for care where we've brought together all census information into one place over time and this allows us to understand the intersectional profiles of of of unpaid um carers. Um we can break this down by um a whole host of um uh social um characteristics. Um and we have also created a number of different resources for this as well. So again this is all completely automated. Um colleagues can um enter their um email addresses and they can request all the information um from the dashboard. This is all um publicly publicly available as well with um cartoons and animations that help to understand um how to interpret um the the stats that we're um providing in terms of unpaid care. Um it also um provides an instant automated um service where all the stats and the PowerPoint presentations and all the information from the dashboard are um are sent directly um to to to colleagues who want that information. and and we've had um you know quite a lot of uptake um in this kind of work um from um from charities and advocacy groups etc who are using this information for whole range of um reporting and and case study um development business cases um etc. So we'll be following a very similar um uh approach. So this brings me to the to the work package around um client level um analytics and linkages which again will be driven by the community um of practice um and the the CP the community of practice um working directly with the 14 local authorities in the um in the West Midlands um to understand data collection processes metadata for analysis and processing um etc. um the implementation I think one of the the key things that we're um that we're developing as well is that we are um we are using what we call strategic improvement coaches where we are paying the time of practitioners in local authorities um to use the tool to take that tool um and to um to embed it in the systems and the working that they that they have. So we really want to be able to not only provide the resource ourselves but we also want to create that um resource for um for for those colleagues um as well um we want to be able to develop learning materials as I've said so free and open access resources training programs and short courses around um the systems videos and animations um doing so as well um and making sure that everything is um is freely available um as as best we can in terms of open science practice. ices. Um we also um have had ideas for other possibilities for the work. So once we we we bring these data assets into one place um is it possible for example to use them to inform national statistics on things like unpaid care or disability um for example. Um the system is al it's also possible to not only um uh bring together publicly available data but we can also um partition different parts of the dashboard for um private provider um data that might not be um um made publicly um available. So we can look at other um other elements of of uh adult social care as well. um as I mentioned some of the um the analytic and forecasting functions um that we can um look at as well to understand future scenarios. Um and something else that we're quite excited about is that a lot of the uh information um that we able to ingest um also includes unstructured uh data. So um there's a a capacity to be able to use uh large language models and natural language processing to um to explore the information in that unstructured data in terms of case notes and inspection reports etc to build up a a sort of rich and more nuanced picture. Um so just very quickly for the last um um few minutes why this matters um there's a strong and growing government interest in better richer and more usable adult social care data. Um local authorities currently um operate with um fragmented inconsistent or inaccessible insight. Um the national expectations are rising in terms of um uh care quality commission um um um reporting and expectations um integrated care system um pressures etc. Um there's l limited actionable evidence on what works in adult social care. Um often difficulty linking adult social care data with other geographical information. Um insufficient capability to use data at pace to support day-to-day uh decision- making. Um so we're proposing and if I can just boil um um everything down into what we will deliver a modern day infra data infrastructure um which is integrated and transparent open where possible and secure where where needed um data analysis at scale um uh combining public adult social care data, geographical information and and information on local context. customized local um reports um tailored to the um to the needs of um local authorities or uh people uh people in practice. Um there will have this interactive um data site which I've already shown you two um two versions of the the data hub that already exists but also the um the unpaid care uh dashboard um integration support so helping councils um use insights and commissioning um workforce market shaping etc and and a range of learning resources around that. Um so what are we learning currently? Um that we we're learning that councils want insight that is timely, simple, flexible and grounded in their lived reality. Um live lived experience partners add dimensions that data alone cannot reveal. Um so there's lots of silences um in the data. I think it's really important to um um to uh to note that as well as as as everyone knows workforce constraints means tools must reduce burden and not create more work. Um the appetite for cross um council benchmarking and shared of sensemaking is has been really strong. Um this has been this can be used to improve the readiness for CQC assurance. Supports placebased planning and and integrated care system um alignment creates a shared evidence base for commissioners, providers and lived experience partners. Enables quicker and more uh confident decision- making and embeds open science um throughout. And I guess the the last slide that I just really um keen to share and um um before I before I stop is just an invitation open call for invitation and collaboration. We're really interested in understanding um or working with um colleagues on on the call. We'd really love you to to join the community to help us shape um what the the priorities might be or what you might need from something um like this. Um explore opportunities to pilot and learn from the from the platform. help to define new data sets and better ways to capture um lived experience throughout this process as well and work with us to ensure that data is a tool for care, inclusion, and well-being and not just um one um for compliance. Thank you so much. &gt;&gt; Thanks very much, Matt. We've got one minute for questions. There's uh two in the chat uh in the Q&amp;A and one in the uh two in the chat as well. But thank you for a great presentation. Um so first question um are all of your local authorities on the same system and if not how did you overcome any issues bringing the data together very quickly? &gt;&gt; Uh yes so they they they are on the on the same system and um so that was just um there is there there are lots of um data sharing agreements. There's lots of compliance and governance that went into that um which was um a lot of hard work with some of the the the aggregated data. it's less so um because that's all publicly available. So that was just bringing that um together in in sort of um more standard more standard ways that that wasn't so much of an issue. Excellent. We better stop there because I know we've got our final keynote speaker uh talk that is starting right now. Obviously, we better let people go, but if you are able to stay on uh to answer the questions uh in the Q&amp;A, that would be fantastic, just so that people know how to contact you and things like that. But thanks again. Great talk and um yeah, that's the end of this session. Goodbye. &gt;&gt; Thanks. So thanks everyone.