Hi everyone, thanks for joining us on the targeting care and advancing analytic uh session this afternoon. So our first speaker in this session is Daniel Slater and he's going to be talking about using linked NHS data sets to rapidly generate insights into suicide deaths and prevention opportunities. And Daniel's talk will be about 10 minutes long and so we'll have five minutes for questions but over to you Daniel. &gt;&gt; Cool. Thank you. Um yeah, hi everyone. I'm Dan from Bangra City Council and yeah today I'm going to be talking about using linked NHS data sets to generate insight into suicide death. Um just as a disclaimer beforehand, we are going to be speaking about suicide. So if you find any of those topics sensitive um here have some support lines um and please feel free to to drop out um at any point. So kind of a background to this project is obviously suicide is a national public health priority and prevention really uh depends on understanding sort of the key uh events leading up to each death and the the tricky bit is that suicide there's lots of uh complicated reasons. It's sort of a multifaceted problem and lots of different factors can be missed if you just look at instances through broad statistics. Um and our kind of solution and way of addressing this is to use a quarter report um to allow for quick repeatable insights that could also sort of give a more um holistic view of people um people's deaths. So the data um for our data sets we kind of linked lots of information from Aristotle which is the BOL ICV's remote uh desktop platform and we kind of looked at um emergency department attendances, hospital admissions, emergency service calls, uh prescriptions and mental health uh mental health care contacts. All of these being linked around um people who've died in Birmingham and Sol from um 2020 onwards. So the kind of main um Oh, sorry. I don't think my uh my screen's been uh sharing. Yeah, just to to to go that again. So um yeah, we've linked all these data sets together and kind of got this um joint view. Um so sort of the main one of the main benefits of this is it lets us look at information in a way we might not be able to otherwise. So with the um kind of demographic information of people have died, a lot of the cases in the um death register, it might not be coded there, but since we're linking a lot of these data sets together, it allows us to kind of see the um the ethnicity from previous instances and kind of get that data where it might have been missed otherwise. Um on the right here, you can see the a bar chart of the um people who've died by their ethnicity. Um and you can see at the top here this is kind of another advantage of using quto because this sort of commentary this narrative is um kind of generated as data is pulled into the report. So we can see the 620 registered suicides um you can see the average age and ethnicity um and method of suicide and all of this is completely repeatable um as as we pull the the data from the SQL server. um one of the um sort of standard things it can do is is produce these um statistics standardized statistics on um the bold deaths. So we can kind of see that um from age bands 30 to um 60 um are kind of the the significant um age bands and with our kind of ethnicity data we can do this u for ethnicity as well. So here's another graph showing um sort of the the standardized rates by ethnicity for males and we can see um white is the only um statist statistically significant one here. So the the the real I'd say kind of useful bit of linking the data sets like this is we can get these really high level overviews of how these people are interacting with the health system and sort of potential places of intervention. So what the bar chart on the right hand side is showing is the percentage of the people who've died who've had at least one contact with the health system through these um different avenues. So we can see that through um physical health prescriptions um 50% of the people who died had at least one prescription given to them in the 12 months of their death. Um and we can kind of see that across all these different data sets we've pulled in. And again at the top here we've kind of got this high level overview of how um generally speaking how many people have have had some form of contact with health system. So we can see that um 78.5% had some um form of contact through one of these sort of different avenues in the data set. And just to kind of show a bit how we can look at this over time. So for each of these sort of contact areas, this one's showing um mental health care contacts, we can look at it per month and then we can kind of get a more a general idea of the sort of pathways people go to go through when interacting with these services. So sort of a general trend in this graph is the closer uh time to death, the more people have scheduled care um contacts. So you can kind of use um that across the different data sets for um whatever [clears throat] indu uh insights you're kind of looking to um develop in that way. Um so this is kind of what I talked about earlier with having things more than just broad statistics and what we're able to do with these data sets is sort of get individual level uh patient level timelines. So whilst it's hard for those broad graphs to kind of see an individual patient's journey, [clears throat] um we can kind of automate the process of creating these timelines and we can see all the sort of uh interactions with a health system for a single patient um across um the year before their death. So here's an example on the screen now. Um, for example, the the green points and the pink points are um physical health prescriptions, mental health prescriptions. We can see um in this scenario, they had um reoccurring um prescriptions. At the top, we can see their cares, the red points where they've missed care contacts. We can see they've missed a few contacts before death. And um the good thing about this being in a quarter report, I can't show you in the PowerPoint, but this is also interactive. So you can hover over and then on each of these points you can kind of get um a bit more information about uh these events. For example, maybe for an ambulance call you can see the subject of a call or um the emergency department attendance you can kind of see why they attended the emergency department. And this is kind of in in uh collaboration with the broad statistics is kind of given us that more holistic view we're aiming to achieve. Um and yeah we we can generate these for all all the deaths in the data using the Sudiniz NHS numbers. Um another sort of aspect of report is um the mapping of these deaths. So obviously on the death register we've got access to their sort of place of place of residence and when we combine that with um calls to 999 hospital data we can see when a suicide occurred outside a place of residence and by doing that we can map these and sort of look for potential um points of intervention or potential places where additional safeguarding might be useful. Um, for example, if lots of the the blue points which indicate a suicide by drowning were near certain bodies of water, you maybe you can make a case for um some sort of additional safeguarding um in those areas. Just to touch a bit on the limitations of the data. So I think the major flaw we kind of had to grapple with was that there is no no specific date of death in the data set. And since we're looking at prevention opportunities, um it it can sometimes be hard to filter out events that might immediately precede someone's death that aren't actually a prevention opportunity. Um we did manage to resolve this in a way where um if someone had an ambulance call for Perry arrest, so their heart stopped, we can sort of get a predicted date of death, but it was definitely a limitation in how um kind of useful we can make those um graphs. um and sort of something for further work. Um a full understanding of suicide kind of requires it's good to have all all this data about health, but there's probably some aspect of social e and economic data set so we could link in and maybe get an even even better understanding of sort of the people who've died and their pathways and sort of more stuff to understand these people's um individual conditions or economic status would be would be useful I feel. Um so just some takeaway conclusions. So um link data sets can be really powerful. We've managed to do something these some things in this report that can be hard to do otherwise and done some really unique things. Um and I think the mix of sort of mediums works quite well and paint a better picture. You kind of get these the broad stats and individual timelines. It's give you the best of both worlds um in sort of helping helping you understand these people's pathways. Um but um just to caveat that our insight can only be as good as our our data and um sort of in incorporating more complex data sets or improving the ones we already have are sort of ways we can take this project um sort of further than it already is. So um yeah thanks for listening. Uh many thanks to Birmingham Solid Hill mental health teams and for um the BL ICB for continue work continued work of the project. Um if you're interested please get in touch. Um I've got a link to the GitHub there which has the the SQL code to extract the data if you have access to Aristotle um and some code to write help uh create the timelines and the graphs. Um and yeah that's it. Thanks um are there for any questions? Thanks very much, Daniel. And uh yeah, questions coming in thick and fast. And uh I should have introduced myself properly at the start. I'm uh I'm Gordon, director of uh the administrative data research UK program. So all of this talk about linked administrative data to support um informed policy decisions is music to my ears. And I remember some research from Scotland a few years back that made that link between it being a risk factor if um people with me mental health conditions start missing appointments and uh have you done any analysis on whether that is actually a risk factor for suicides because I noticed that you had that those miscar contacts in there. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So sort of in the report we have these um I showed I showed one so the kind of the months before death timelines. So inside the report it has those for sort of the care appointments. Um we've got different tabs for the um canceled uh care appointments attended. Um I won't I won't make any any statements on um conclusions you can draw from that just because there's lots of different caveats to sort the data. um all that sort of stuff is is sort of in report and you can help you can generate those using the sort of linked data sets quite easily. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's really useful and to inform policy because I know it was something that the NHS were looking at whether uh there should be charges for missed appointments but clearly if it's a risk factor for suicide that's not going to be particularly helpful. But uh we'll go to the the um questions in the chat now. Uh it's a question from uh Liliana Vales said what methodology did you use for the linkage um &gt;&gt; yeah and what linkage quality was observed &gt;&gt; yeah so essentially what what we did um off the um I think it's the the SQL called the VW death register and we extracted all um ICD10 codes where it was um suicide or suicide of undetermined attempt um And from that we used their um sedominized NHS number and then ex through all these different data sets I listed um we essentially extracted their um attendances via their um sedomized NHS number. Um in terms of quality I guess I'd take that as quality of the data. Um so we have &gt;&gt; linkage quality there was um a lot of records that didn't link I'm guessing. Uh I think it's tricky obviously &gt;&gt; um if they didn't link it would be hard to know about it because obviously we wouldn't we wouldn't pull them through but from we can see from their normalized um NHS number if I pulled through and it seemed like we did have um like yeah a good broad coverage of of people who died. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Um so a couple of other questions. One from Sharon uh Makier. Uh we use suicide audits assessing coroner's reports. I'd be interested in comparing our approach with uh uh yours as we are pulling out similar findings and have you used coroner's reports in the past? If yes, why did you change approach? Um so in terms of sort of other approaches I I've been I've been put into this project to sort sort of work with um Richard Wilson from the B ICB to kind of use their data. Um it's not something I've worked with sort of in the past in terms of coroner reports and things like that. But I think my understanding is those can sometimes be kind of tricky to um develop or or they take a bit of time. sort of the approach we're looking at is being able to do it really quickly using the sort of um routinely collected data sets to try and do that at rapid pace essentially um via the the patient timelines that I had shown um but in terms of changing an approach I I've not worked with those myself so I can't comment that &gt;&gt; yeah and when I was at ONS we did some work on the uh coroners reports particularly the narrative reports but they're really tricky because a coroner can write a whole essay about a death and then pulling out consistent information can be very tricky. Um, we should probably move on to the next talk. Thank you very much, Daniel. Really interesting talk. Loads of comments in the chat and the um the Q&amp;A. So, please do feel free to answer those in the background. &gt;&gt; We'll do brilliant. Thank you. Um, so waiting for the next uh present. Oh, waiting for the next presenter so we can uh go back to one of your uh one of the other &gt;&gt; Okay, cool. [laughter] &gt;&gt; questions. Um, so yeah, just looking at the attendee chat. Um so there's a question around um why didn't you have access to their date of death if you start as your start point was extracting the suicide or undetermined deaths. &gt;&gt; So so we we in the data set it just had the year and the month they died with so we had we had the month just not the the specific um date of date of death. So, um, yeah, so that I think it's kind of when we want to see events that maybe happened literally like a week before they died. Um, it's tricky to do that when we just have just have a month. Um, yeah, that that that's all I meant by um don't have the exact day of death. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, that that makes a lot of sense. Uh, I'm just going to go back to the Q&amp;A chat. uh uh did you run into any challenges uh when you're linking data and how did you overcome them? &gt;&gt; Um I think we we did have a few just using the remote desk desktop platform. Um I think there was some issues around sometimes um essentially working with with Richard Wilson on this we'd run the same SQL code and get different um sort of different data sometimes which is weird. I think it was some sort of access issue on the actual platform um just just how my account was set up. So we managed to resolve that. I think that that was probably the sort of the main um challenges but yeah apart apart from that I think everything was was relatively easy using the um since we have the NHS number. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Excellent. I think we'll stop there because in the attendee chat I can see that u Muhammad Hussein who is our next presenter is actually in the audience but he's trying to [gasps] um become a presenter. Um, so, uh, I don't know whether there's anyone backstage that can help with that.