Hi everyone. Uh welcome back to uh hacker day two. Uh my name is Chris Beely. I'm um head of data science at the strategy unit. Um I'm talking to you today partly as the kind of uh project lead uh for hacker. Um so I just want to just give a few reflections on how it's been going so far. Uh and I'm going to talk about how fabulous everyone has been uh towards the end. Um, so we've sort of embraced online this year. Um, I think it's probably fair to say that Hacker is not in the best situation in terms of the way that it's funded. Um, and online was a was a path through. Um, we've tried to, you know, make it a full fat, you know, decision and really lean into it. Um, I think there are benefits to online. Uh I think there are probably uh people listening to this that wouldn't be listening um if I this was uh uh in person. Um and I think the same about speakers as well. So there's something good about that. Um clearly uh you're always at the mercy of internet connections and so on and at the mercy of other various bits of glitches and firewalls and everything that else that we've been through today. Um so uh we're really interested to know what you think about it. Um, there have been feedback links, I believe, posted uh throughout yesterday and I'm sure they'll be posted uh throughout today as well. Please let us know. Please let us know uh what you think about Hacker in general in the program, but also please let us know uh how the online experience is, whether you like it to be online and so on and so forth. We're really interested to hear more about that. Um it's been a real learning journey for us um delivering uh a fully online conference. It's certainly something that I have never done before and I'm sure that is also true of a lot of the people um on the hacker team. It's a whole different ballgame quite honestly. Um all the logistical challenges and all the things that you think about are all different. Uh it perhaps sounds pretty much the same. Um but it it really isn't. Um and of course another big thing that's going on is we're all learning how to use the platform. So, I'm sure at at least one point uh yesterday uh some of you will have seen the panicked look in my eye as I realized I didn't quite know what button to press next or someone else didn't or so on and so on and so on. Um but I think actually um you know it's an online conference but I think actually the atmosphere has been really good. I've been to academic conferences in the past where people just sit there with their arms folded you know just waiting for coffee. Um but I think here we're all here to learn. We're all here to appreciate each other. We all here to have a good time and I think everyone's coped really well uh with what's been going on. The Mark Far teams call was both fabulous um piece of invention um and probably the most NHS uh solution to a problem I could possibly think of. Absolutely world class. Um so um that's what I want to say about online. Um the um the next thing I want to talk about is what hacker is all about. Um so people often say to me every year, oh let's make hacker about this and let's make hacker about that and all this kind of thing. Um and I really can't do that. Nobody can. Uh and I'm really glad about that. I'm really glad that two or three or even a hundred people can't sit in a room and decide what hacker's about. Hacker is about whatever you're doing. Um it has to be. So, um, the program is really excellent. It's a huge amount of work. I'm going to mention the person who did that huge amount of work a bit later on. Um, it's really, really great. And as Ben was saying yesterday, it really shows, uh, you know, worldclass analytics. Um, I [clears throat] do think we've been put upon a little bit uh in the media, in the newspapers recently, the likes of us, uh, as I'm sure some of you uh are thinking too, and I've seen some fairly, um, inflammatory comments on LinkedIn along those lines as well. Um, and uh, so I think hacker is a really good way of us standing up and saying, well, actually, we really matter. Um, so that's really great. Um, I think hacker is about doing worldass analysis. I think it's also about using data to make decisions. Um I was hearing about a very egregious piece of policy based evidence uh yesterday that I won't name. Um and of course we had Sally on the first day yesterday um talking about basically you know things that people like to believe. People like to have little beliefs that they carry around with them. Um and actually often the evidence doesn't stack up and that's really important if we want to do our jobs really well. Um and you know we're saving lives. We're not we're not um we're not doing something trivial here. Um I think there is a lot of uncertain future around at the moment for a lot of people listening to this including me actually. Um there's been as I've mentioned before some pretty gross messaging around the value of uh some of the things that um that me and and other of my colleagues do. Um everybody wants AI. That's all you ever hear about. Nobody wants to talk about data and actually nobody wants to talk about humans. Um, and so one of Jess's points that I really really have never heard before actually really value is this idea that a machine will only, you know, will make a will make an efficiency uh that isn't necessarily equal. Um, so there's a video game actually that uh reminds me of called Universal Paper Clips. And Universal Paper Clips the plot of this video game is you're an AI and your job is to make paper clips. Um, and you win the game if you turn all the matter in the universe into paper clips. And it's sort of, you know, it's a jokey way of exploring that idea that actually an AI, an algorithm won't necessarily consider the nuance and the, you know, what matters behind. We clearly don't want to turn all the matter in the universe into paper clips. And equally, you actually don't want to make all the white dudes healthy and, you know, leave everyone else in the dust. Um, so Jess's points are really, I think, uh, valuable at the moment. Um, Ben talked about the Goldacre review. Um, I'm still banging on about the Goldacre review. Lots of other people are still banging on about it and quite right. There has been a mixed response in terms of what's actually happened from it. Uh, you are sitting in one of the recommendations. So, that's really great. Uh, some of them have not been done so well. Uh, hackers not on a particular stable footing uh, funding wise. So, uh, if it is something that, uh, that we need and we value, then I would, uh, put it to you to ask those in charge of the money to make sure that it stays alive. I think it's really worthwhile. Um, Ben said something as well which I really like. Uh, basically, if you want to improve things, if you want to do something that matters and improve people's health, be an analyst. And I I I completely agree. Uh, there's a great quote from a data scientist that I like to wheel out occasionally. Uh, the best minds of my generation are thinking about how to make people click ads. That sucks. And I totally agree. What we're doing is way, way, way more important than that. And it deserves the best of the smartest people of the other generation. So, thank you for being those people. Um, I'm going to shut up very soon and introduce Steven Wyatt. I am going to finish just by thanking uh various people. Uh, you would normally do this the end of the conference, but I'm talking at the beginning, so I'm going to do it now because I'm the lead for hacker. Uh, I want to thank Karen at the uh, Hubo platform who's given uh, lots of um, help to us um, ironing out various little bits of glitches that we've had throughout the day. I want to thank the health foundation for their um, assistance uh, with um, allowing us to fund Hacker. If it weren't for the Health Foundation, this wouldn't be happening. So, thank you um, to the Health Foundation. Thanks to the conference advisory group. We've had really good engagement this year. um it's hard to make time in your day um to engage with something like that, but we've had lots and lots of really really great ideas and I think that shines through in the program actually. So I'm really uh grateful to everyone that's uh participated in this way. I want to thank you the audience. Uh we have, as I mentioned, had glitches. We've had Teams calls being shared. You know, we've had various strange We've had me with a panicked look in my eye thinking, "What am I even supposed to be saying? I didn't even know I was on stage." Um, and I think we've all just, you know, dug in, enjoyed ourselves, and just, um, taken the rough with the smooth. So, thank you very much for all being so patient and kind with us. Uh, I want to thank the hacker team. Um, so Rachel, uh, did, I would say, the lion share, maybe not all the work, but certainly the lion share of the work on the program. It is an absolutely miserable, horrible uh, feat. Uh, I've done it. Nat's done it. Uh, it's incredibly hard work. Uh, and she's done a really excellent job. So, thank you, Rachel. Uh, I want to thank Nat. Nat is, uh, a polygot, I would say, in the sort of, you know, beautiful 19th century, you know, aristocratic style. Nat can do anything she turns her hand to. She's done loads of great design. She's done loads of great coms. Uh, and she's generally just kept the show on the road. [clears throat] Uh, Mimuda, I think, is the real lead of Hacker. And, honestly, I don't know why she's not saying all this, but anyway, you've got me instead. uh Mimuda has led us beautifully and uh gracefully throughout this whole thing. Um and I think you know communicates the value and the meaning of what we're doing so well and that's so so important. Something I'm not great at. Um and of course the workhorse of the whole thing is match match has been absolutely um working his socks off literally working his socks off. I've seen them on fire at times in meetings uh to make this all happen. So thank you very much matches. Really really really appreciated and I think uh what you've done is really excellent. Um so I am going to shut up any minute now. So please ask the world. We need hacker. We need it to be funded. We need it to be valued. We need us to be valued. So please tell anyone who will listen that. Please have fun. Please ask lots of questions. Ask awkward questions. I like to do that when I'm in a thing. Stick your hand up and ask them to explain what the heck they're talking about. That's a uh often a good question, I think. uh share what you're doing. Um be proud of it and share it. Steal with pride. Take other people's work. Don't do it yourself. Just, you know, use you use what's tried and tested and use what hacker gives you in that sense. Um and I think the most important thing at all is go back to your offices. Do well maybe in your offices. I don't know where you are. Uh get out of your pajamas if if that's appropriate. Do awesome work and bring it back next year and let's all continue to advance what we're doing and celebrate it. uh through this medium.