Let's move on to the next one. Thanks a lot. Let's bring uh let's bring the next person in, Jane, if we may. We have Lucy Morgan from the strategy unit presenting with support from Sally Thompson. And here they are. Um excellent. So, while you're just getting your getting your slides ready, um this is all about modeling renal care from progression to diagnosis. Uh and we're just about there. Excellent. We can see the slides. Off you go. Right. Okay. Just unmuting there. So, uh, thank you very much. Okay. Um, so, hi everyone. Um, great to be joining you today for Hacker. Um, I'm going to be presenting today, um, our model of renal care, which looks at the whole path of renal care from chronic kidney disease all the way through to kidney replacement therapy. Um, this is work that myself and Sally have been working on for um, quite a long time now. Um Sally is a system dynamics expert and has been building our kidney um progression model or kidney disease progression model I should say and I'm a discrete event simulation modeler and have been building the um kidney replacement therapy patient pathways side of the model. So together we've combined our knowledge of system dynamics and discrete event simulation to bring together a model that's hybrid in using two different simulation methodologies and um kind of combines I guess the best of both of our skills which is uh quite an exciting thing to do. So I'll take it away to um tell you a little bit more about the model and give a little demo as well. Um so this project is basically something that um was uh motivated by the Midlands kidney operational uh delivery network. Um so they came to uh the strategy unit um with some concerns about um the capacity for incenter um diialysis over time and they wanted to um see what we could do in terms of modeling to try and look at that problem. Um so to kind of give you the backdrop of um kidney care at the moment. So we know the challenges that we don't have sufficient capacity to meet the future needs for renal services. A lot of modeling has been done as to what's going to happen in future and they're all pointing to the um same kind of picture where the people going into kidney replacement therapy or the incidence to kidney replacement therapy is growing and growing over time. um and um we're not going to given our current infrastructure have um the capacity to treat all of those people. So need is growing because population is growing and the health uh profile is changing in the population. Now we do have an um opportunity um due to changing models of care to provide better quality of care and more equitable services but we think it's actually because of the complexity of the system it's actually really difficult to um predict and project the likely effect of um different interventions on the system without using something like simulation. So we've taken a simulation ex um approach to try and model this system. Um so um why simulate? Well um simulation allows us to kind of look at the interconnectedness of a system that's very complex. Um it can allow us to explore feedback interactions and also do interventions within the system on a model of the system instead of in the real system itself. So in effect we are playing out uh interventions in a risk-free environment. So um in healthcare I mean in many situations uh that's a good thing to do right because you don't want to um risk doing something bad in your real system but in healthcare where people are at the heart of what we're doing we don't want to um play with a system if we think that there could be potential patient harm at the end of that. So basically what we're trying to do is give them a model that they can test out interventions on in a safe environment, create that um evidence-driven um uh well evidence-led um business cases I guess to actually make changes to the system in future. So there are a number of different ways that we've suggested that the model we that we've built could be um used by um people in renal care. It could be used for testing individual interi intuition about how impactful different interventions could be. Um for supporting collective decision- making. So people coming together to try and work out what the best and um strategic most strategic thing to do next is and then informing and evidencing future plans. So giving people the evidence they need to say um this is a good thing to do. This is the impact that we think it will have and then um and try and get the funding to actually act on that. Okay. So an umbrella of the objectives of what we were trying to do and um these have developed over time uh were firstly to try and look at how demand is going to change over time for kidney replacement therapy. Um what that means in terms of capacity. How can we influence that by looking at upstream interventions? So things in the chronic kidney disease pathway and how can we influence it downstream also. So directly within the kidney replacement therapy pathways by influencing um things in the system and then also looking at the relative cost of each intervention um versus a a baseline no change or status quo type scenario where we we um project forward if if nothing was to change over time um what what might we look what might we see okay so as I said we've taken a hybrid approach to modeling um renal care in general. Um now the two different models uh they were both informed by a participative modeling approach which is something that we at the strate unit try and um advocate for. Basically, we're trying to bring the clinicians, the um nurses, the commissioners, all different people that would interact with the renal pathway and even the patients themselves. We are trying to engage them with the model um bring them along the modeling journey with us so that when we get to the point of actually showing them the outputs of our model and some of these what if experimental scenarios that they then trust the model because they've understood how we've built it and that we've reflected something that is their real system back to them along the way. So um participative modeling is something that we've done throughout the project and we'd just like to acknowledge that um Marie and Mark from Midland's uh renal network have been um our lead stakeholders here and have been um helping us um throughout the project make sure that we're engaging with all of these different people but also um have been really responsive throughout um themselves and also um Anto from Lubber University um has there for the um kind of um I guess uh I don't want to say educational but um simulation expertise as well as a backup for us to ask um extra questions which has been great. Okay, so uh this is um at a high level um our model of uh renal care. Um it I've put it in two boxes because they are two separate models but they are linked. So we could think of this as a sequential hybrid model. The first model represents CKD progression. So we're thinking about um how people um get progressively more and more ill having been with um chronic kidney disease over time. And then at some point in their journey they develop endstage um kidney disease and they require kidney replacement therapy. And it's the incidents into kidney replacement therapy that we're interested in from that model that we can then feed into our second model. So the KRT incident from our first model actually drives our second model because it actually pushes patients in at a rate um well it governs the rate at which people um are are pushed into our second model. Now the second model is of the actual kidney replacement therapy service. So it looks at all the different pathways um that patients can flow around that system. So are they in dialysis? Are they at home doing diialysis or in center? What type of diialysis is that? And maybe are they living with transplants? Um or have they um um been put onto conservative management. So that is much more of an individual level model. So we're looking at individual patient movements. Whereas in our original model um sorry in the first model the CKD progression model we're looking at the flow of a population through a disease and how they um how their disease progresses at a certain rate over time. So the first is modeled using system dynamics because that's all about looking at flows of population and the second is using discrete event simulation because that's all about looking at individual patient movements through a system. So that's why we have chosen the two methodologies we have and combined them in this way. So it gives us basically combining these models gives us a joined up picture of renal care. Um it allows us to play out upstream and downstream interventions and look at the impact of those in this risk-free environment providing defensible evidence for the implementation of the renal interventions that are of interest to um Midlands and also uh beyond. So let's just have a quick look at um the CKD pathway. Um so um in our CKD pathway, people enter the system developing CKD initially stage three. So it's actually really hard to detect earlier stages of CKD. So we've let data govern that we start at stage three here. So initially they're undiagnosed. Most diagnosis occurs at stage three, but some of them will worsen to stage four and five um while still undiagnosed. um then uh diagnosis management can slow progression from stage three to stage four. So we have a slightly different rate at which they flow from diagnosed CKD stage three to diagnose CKD stage 4 as we do for und diagnosed stage three to stage four five and then the disease will get worsen and at some point um for some patients require mean that they require kidney replacement therapy and mortality can occur from any of these different places. Now what we've done with this model is we've looked at a number of different interventions in it including primary prevention strategies that can reduce the number of people flowing into our model. So that might be something like smoking sessation or um the um new weight loss drugs, things like that. The impact of those on slowing the um the rate at which people are coming into the model. We've looked at increased diagnosis. Of course, if you're diagnosed, potentially you are um having um treatment for CKD and and therefore your rate of flowing from stage three to stage four five is slower. Um and also we've looked at and this is one of the ones that we primarily looked at um over the last couple of months is medication. So how can medications be used to slow the rate at which people um flow through the model? um how can we slow their progression using things like SGLT2 inhibitors? Um okay. Right. Okay. So this model's useful because it projects um our future CKD prevalence um and again drives that second uh model for kidney replacement therapy. um it can look at how prevention and uh drugs and new medications can impact CKD prevalence and um then again be played downstream into our KRT model to look at how that can impact capacity. Um Sally has built this amazing interactive freely accessible tool which I think she's going to drop the link to in the chat now um that will allow you to play with those different interventions. I was going to do a quick demo of that um that tool, but um I might just leave that for the end just so we've got time to quickly go through the kidney replacement therapy model as well. Um and again, we're supporting evidence-based long-term KRT planning. So, if you want to um after this, I would suggest that you go and have a little play with that tool because it's really user friendly. Um and um if you you can see here on the left in gray, we've got different interventions that you can play with. and then you can see the impact of them versus a baseline status quo do nothing type scenario. So you're basically seeing the impact of that intervention um into the future population. Okay. Uh I'll quickly now talk about um modeling replacement therapy using discrete event simulation. So um as I said before so we're using discrete event simulation here because we're looking at how patients specifically flow through the model. Um so um for this I think I actually just missed it flashing up there. So our last model we um in the CKD model we're looking at regional and national level. Uh for this kidney replacement patient uh treatment pathways model we're also dropping that down as well to a an extra level of granularity where you can look at um trust level data. So you can look at a kidney center um and see the cap the the the capacity um implications of from the model um in that in that smaller lower um granularity model as well. So in our kidney replacement um uh therapy uh capacity model patients develop uh renal failure. So we've got that push through or incidence of people developing kidney replacement therapy from the CKD model that pushes people into this model. They then um could go to conservative care which means they don't actually receive care for kidney replacement therapy but they are given um obviously like paliotative care. Um some patients might be suitable for transplant and if they are then they could have that preemptively which means they have it before starting any diialysis or other treatment. um and that could be a live or could have a donor transplant and then they'll live with it for some time until they die or um the graph fails at which point they join the start of the the system again i.e. they're judged as whether they're suitable for transplant and go through the same process. Um if they um weren't um if they didn't have a preemptive transplant then they progress to diialysis and they're allocated to one of the three diialysis modalities in the model. So inc center home hemo or um peritineal diialysis um and then after some time they progress onto transplant. Um but not everybody will um that's listed for transplant will actually receive a transplant in the model. Um if they weren't suitable for transplant then they go straight to modality allocation and they can change modality allocation throughout the time they spend in the model. um and then there's a probability of death from any of the um activities in the model and that depends on the attributes of the patients flowing around it. So at every decision making point within this model the patients attributes like their age, their referral status, so whether they were um an early referral or a late referral for example, they all govern how that they move around this um this system. So the the time um they're in the system, the probability of them being suitable for transplant etc. they're all governed by different probability distributions that are again governed by the attributes that that patient has. Okay. So things that we were going to look at intervening in this system were looking at moving people out of incenter hemmoiialysis into home or peritineal diialysis. So trying to take the pressure off um the capacity problems that we're seeing in center um increasing uh diversion to conservative care because there was a view we wanted to build that into the model because there is a view that um perhaps in some situations more people are being put onto um diialysis than um is potentially um good for the patient. So we were um looking at um the impact of potentially increasing that in in the future. Um increasing preemptive transplants. So if we um some hospitals do this really well. They get a patient in, they work them up very quickly for transplant and then they get the transplant done within uh a number of days. But that's not for all systems. It's not the same across the country. So um can can we find out the impact if of improving that? And then also looking at the increase in in live donors and donors basically in general um is of interest. And finally we'll look at um the increase in [gasps] or sorry decreasing late referrals into the system. So that's people that have um not been detected as having um chronic kidney disease and therefore not been identified as needing kidney replacement therapy and they they come in through emergency um routes. um and these people are much um they have much worse outcomes or they've got the probability of them having worse outcomes is is higher because of that late referral I them catching it um further into their journey. So this um pathway is useful because it allows us to look at the capacity requirements. Um it allows us to look at the impact of downstream interventions. So changes in those actual pathways. But also equally if we run a preventative um intervention in the CKD model. So we're looking at the um the chronic kidney disease population and we do a preventative measure which means fewer people are flowing into kidney replacement therapy. we can feed that into uh this model by changing that incidence profile over time that um that actually pushes patients into this model in general. Um okay, so um this model is at the moment it's available on um the our strategy unit GitHub. We're just finalizing the open-source version of this model which runs in Simpai which is a Python package uh for simulation. Um it comes with an Excel user interface where basically you design your scenario. So you pick your center and your region and your incident profile and then any of the interventions you want to try out and then you run the model in Python and all the results are pushed back into Python and you can see um plots of prevalence over time. So um versus the baseline. Okay. So I don't know if I've got a minute I probably don't have a minute to actually talk about any of our future plans. So maybe we can just go to questions. Is that okay, Phil? &gt;&gt; That'd be fabulous. That's what I was lurking for. Yes, we've got we've got the main stage back on in a minute or two. So, um, thanks. That's really interesting and a really complex modeling approach there. We've got a couple of questions I'll I'll I'll smash into one, which is how you essentially stress tested all of this, uh, and how you ensured you understood the uncertainty. &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, I think that's a great question. So, um, with as with any simulation project, um, both models have been validated on real world data. So the CKD model is validated on CVD prevent data um which is um a well-known data source um and the um kidney replacement capacity model is all validated against um the UKRR so UK renal registry data. it was built um using that data and then up to the end of 2022 and then we look at how it performs in the years 2022 to 2025 um to see is the model actually performing well on um a test data set for example. So we can do a number of things to check um but that that um the process of validation I think is just as important as the process of model building. So I think that was a great question. &gt;&gt; Super and we are just about out of time. You've got you've got as ever the ultimate the ultimate sign of respect from an analytical crowd of a demand to get into the nuts and bolts of the assumptions and parameters and code and all the rest of it. So that's over in the chat. I'm sure people can pick up with you on that afterwards. Um so I think that's all for me to do is wrap up the session. So thanks to all of our speakers who've been fantastic. Thanks for the big organizer. Stick around for networking afterwards. Real good project will come out of it. uh and you'll get to know some good people too. But yes, thanks very much everyone.