Here we go. Excellent. All right. I'm delighted to welcome Ephiro who's joining us from Let's just uh I have moved my notes. Let me get my notes back in the right place. Here we go. Ephagiro is joining us from Guys and St. Thomas's to talk to us about making easy the default. So, this is driving digital uptake in NHS11 dental and prescription pathways using behavioral change theory. Over to you. Um well hi my introductions have been done so I could just move over to the first slide. So um 7,000 calls are made daily to NHS11 online for emergencies and urgent care from all over England and about 25,000 of those calls are actually made from London areas. Up to 70% of these calls are low acuity issues. for instance, somebody calling because he has a toothache or somebody that just wants a medication refill or other non-lifethreatening concerns. These calls increase the burden on call handlers that are hired by the NHS. Um, this also implies longer wait times for others with real emergencies. So, to help with this, NHS11 offers a selfserve digital option. Um, typically a caller is triaged by natural language processing. That caller then hears an interactive voice response or IVR. I'm going to be using that a lot. Um, which says to the caller, would you rather the digital option with the same outcomes versus waiting on the telephone for a call handler? If the caller sees yes, the caller is sent a link to click um and basically it's referred to the appropriate digital service for somebody calling for dental issues that will be a dentist or a dentist appointment. Now the number of people saying yes as a fraction was about 17% and the ask was to improve this in line with NHS goes to actually shift people um in this category to digital. So we believed that the message from the IVR which was actually the first point of contact for the patient that we could actually manipulate could be optimized as a lowcost lever to change patient behavior. So what I'm going to talk about I'm going to talk about how we increased uptake um basically the amount of people that were actually saying yes to digital and what our findings were and its implication and impact on the NHS as a whole and the lessons that we learned along the way. So what did we do? Um our approach can be broken down into three phases. First we listened, then we designed, and then we tested. In the listen phase, we carried out surveys and focus groups discussions that involved more than 12,000 callers. This gave us a really, really big data set to work with. Um, we then used the zeros taxonomy generation for topic modeling with an open-source small language model. This was a 65 million parameter model and being only 250 MB, it was very easy to run from our laptop. We opted for this because it was safer. We didn't want to throw around patient information to online um Geminina or open AI models and secondly actually even gave us better results with much less hallucination being trained on a single topic. Um we analyzed this imputes and it gave us a better understanding on what the uptake barriers in these patients or in these callers were. Most of them just wanted to speak with someone thinking that symptoms were unique and others just wanted a faster outcome and they thought waiting online would actually do that for them. In the design phase which was the second part we collaborated with NHS behavior the NHS behavioral insights team. Um this helped us improve our capacity and with that we redesigned the original IVR messaging using the east framework for behavioral change. Um, we made the IVR messaging in essence easy, more attractive, or social or timely. Um, which was basically we posted to give us a better response from the people that are actually calling into NHS11 online. Um, for our experiment, we focused mainly on using easy and social for our message optimization. In the test phase which the final says we conducted the Londonwide randomized control trial comparing the redesigned IBI messaging with against the original or the old message. So basically callers were randomly assigned one of the easy or social or the old message in equal parts. Um, in this slide we actually see the details of the original message transformation heard by the patients calling for dental and prescription issues. I'll try and make this really simple and break it down. The control basically said the faster way to get your outcomes d the key changes we made for easy was instead of that we said it takes 90 seconds for your outcomes and for social we said you can reduce the strain on the NHS by doing the digital option and basically those were the three messages that these patients actually randomly received or the callers randomly received in equal amounts. So what did we find? So we compared the trains for uptake in dental and prescription callers who heard either the easy or the social messaging against the control. So what you see in this slide from top to bottom are three trends or graphs showing uptake patterns for dental emergency medication and repeat prescriptions over 6 weeks. Um the green line is the easy. The blue line somewhere in the middle there is the control. What you would actually see is that the green line was trending over the blue line in all three cases. Um after the six week in average we actually saw that there was a 7 to 12 percentage point increase in uptake in all those that actually heard the easy message compared to those that um heard the original or the old message. Of course we repeated this in um other callers. callers calling for respiratory issues, callers calling for chicken porks or for sexual health issues. And what we found was that easy almost always was the best strategy. So we adopted the best messaging strategy across all the pathways. that's in um in addition to dental and prescription we also um did it in um sexual health and operator resp respiratory tract infections and the rest of the pathways that are actually triaged from NHS NHS 111 calls um between August 2024 and May 2025 where we actually got or were actively involved using this method to improve uptake what we saw was a 7% touch point increase in the overall all uptake. This could actually be translated to more than 20,000 callers using the digital option um versus waiting on the call. You could approximate this to about 308 hour call handler days that were saved. Also, when callers were not satisfied with the outcomes, usually what you will see is that most of them call back within 24 hours complaining or trying to get on some other path. Well, callers going through digitals didn't call back at any significantly high or did not call back with significantly higher rates when you compared to those callers that were waiting on the phone. Um, this is a statistical process control chart that shows the bumps that correspond to the times where we actually started the um randomized control trial experiments and the times that we actually fully implemented the best messaging after our findings. This also shows the times where systemic changes were actually happening during that period as well. That's bump one, bump two, and these are the periods I was referring to. So, what did we learn? Um, well, other system changes that happened concurrently made using trends alone as an analysis device um very difficult when we were trying to isolate causal change. And that's why we actually switched over to randomized control trial and introduced control. Um, another thing is that stakeholder buy in was really important because we had to make quick system changes um to the IVR system to accommodate the randomized control trials. If we didn't have buying, this would have been impossible. And again, easy did better for dance than social. That's the easy optimizations did better than the social messaging. Um, we think because patients or callers actually had urgent issues with clear outcomes and basically they're just looking for the easiest, fastest way to get their outcomes. For example, like I said, the dent people calling for dental issues just wanted an appointment and people calling for prescriptions just wanted a refill. Um, social did better in non-urgent calls. People for example calling for symptom based issues like um for chest infections. Social actually seem to trump easy. So in the works we're building a systems dynamics model. um questions that we're actually hoping to answer with that are what are the factors that are important to sustain or to keep this uptake in a positive trajectory. One area that we're looking at is the importance of word of mouth from patients who have had either a positive or a negative experience from being referred to a service by NHS11 and how that or those behaviors actually impact uptake. And thank you for listening and a special thanks of course to all the people that made this possible. um Kate Helen from also working as evaluation manager in the Dominic and Justin who made things happen at the back end and of course Andrew Cox that helped coordinate this. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. Thanks so much. Um I'll give a moment just to put some questions in the chat. I'm so fascinated. This is this is a really fascinating combination of expertise you brought together here. You've got the behavioral insights part, you've got some data science in there with your SLM and all this sort of thing and your AB testing and then you've also got some operational research coming in it sounds like as well in terms of your systems dynamics model. Like how have you put this how have you put this team together to get all of this these difficult different analytical skills into one place? &gt;&gt; Uh easy question. Well, I guess it's just the nature of it. I think um for one health innovation networks actually have or [snorts] bring together people from variouses. I work in the evaluation and insights team that has evaluation managers that are well versed in qualitative analysis. Then myself who um comes from a background of data sciences that is actually a data analyst. Then we actually have project managers. It's basically that's how we attack projects you know I'm using and I guess one of the biggest advantages is that we all have different paradigms and different perspectives on how we actually look to solve a problem and yeah I guess naturally all of it comes together. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Brilliant. And I guess some the changes in uptake you point to are really really big like I mean from the evaluation team have you managed to convert that into you know caller hours or pounds and pence or something like that? &gt;&gt; Um well not financially but what we have been able to do is more or less like with the two or 20,000 plus people that were actually moved or basically took up the digital option rather than actually waiting on the core. Um on an average it takes like about 11 minutes for each call. Um and that when you actually do the math would actually result to like about um 285 hours. Oh, sorry 285 time 8 hours or time 7.5 hours. That was pretty much what I reported. So that's about the savings that we can actually do. So, if you think about it, in the long run, moving um patients or callers, especially those that do not have real emergencies off onto digital pathways actually will save that amount of work. And yeah, well, depending on how much we actually &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; um bill or call handers actually bill for um um each call per hour. Yeah, I think that's basically the savings that we can actually clap about. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. Well, thanks again. And that's a I don't know wonderful mixed mixed analytical approach you've taken there with a really like spectacular result at the end of it. So nice to see such a big effect from that as well. It's really powerful. So thanks very much and um I'm sure you'll be around for the rest of the conference if people want to get hold of you. So please do do that. Um, I'll uh I'll ask James to pull bring our bring bring our next presenters