Hello and welcome to our work stream. Um um and really glad to welcome you all joining us here. We've got some amazing um uh speakers over the next um oh gosh hour or two. So um I'm going to be you to in a minute to a Kiri who is uh a data analyst for the health economics unit uh one of our sister organizations and uh and she's got a fascinating presentation for us. I'm really to hear this because this is close to our heart in the strategy unit. Is AI ready to transform evidence reviews in the NHS? Um, and so welcome her in. Uh, we're running about five or six minutes late, so apologies for that, but we will run over to make sure that Aarta gets her full time. Um, and obviously if you need to drop off um um because you're expecting a break and you've got things planned, please do. But um thank you very much for joining us and uh please um uh Claire is gonna uh um bring in hello. &gt;&gt; Hello. Hello everyone. &gt;&gt; Um, nice to be here. &gt;&gt; Sorry, can you hear me guys? &gt;&gt; Yeah, we can continue. Don't worry, it's a very sensation. Um, and somebody's hands up, all that kind of stuff. So, you're getting the love. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Okay, cool. Good morning everyone. Thank you so much for this opportunity. I would like to speak today about um AI. How can AI help us assist and help us review the evidence for um some like you know some cost-saving interventions in health and care and how we can make a better use of that. So that's the topic for today. I'm going to quickly start my presentation. Okay. So the first things first why is this important and why does this matter? So basically NHS providers um this is important that NHS providers must kind of reduce their cost at least by 1% in 2025 and 2026 and uh it has been difficult along that we have so many evidences supporting that but the problem is it's been so scattered in hundreds and thousands of uh publications and it has been very difficult to kind of u track through those evidences and for ICBS and NHS providers, it has become very crucial to kind of get hold of these evidences through which are scattered in literature'ses just to understand the the actual literature papers which are going to be cost savings. Uh there are many papers which are also like you know they talk about cost but it's more about uh they talk about saving time and saving efforts but the main focus was to reduce the cost at least by 1% in this year 2025 and 2026. Therefore it was quite kind of important for us to uh get this AI because the manual approach of review is kind of very slow it's expensive plus it's like resource intensive as well. So the main reason for us to kind of use AI assistant reviews is to kind of like slowly not have the manual reviews. Okay. Why AI is basically we obviously needed something which was more quicker which was faster which was scalable reliable evidence pipeline and that's the reason we chose the AI assisted reviews. So uh we have like I mentioned before we have all the evidences but they are scattered in hundreds and thousands of publication papers and reviews. So we wanted to do a rapid screening across thousands of publications and that's why we kind of um took the approach of having an AI assisted review. So the main &gt;&gt; Can I just ask you to um put your share screen? So not share screen sorry the um the button that that puts your presentation into viewing mode &gt;&gt; it is in okay one second is are you not able to see the presentation &gt;&gt; presentation mode that's what I mean sorry menopause brain says the wrong words &gt;&gt; okay I think this is the presentation mode &gt;&gt; that perfect I'm going to disappear now thank you &gt;&gt; okay No worries. Okay. So, we basically needed something which was more faster, scalable, a reliable pipeline of which could do an evidence um reviews. So um this was the whole main purpose of using AI assisted review so that we could uh not have a lot of like uh which is not very slow and which is not very time consuming and which is not very um like resourceheavy. So okay so the focus of the review basically was and the main aim and the goal of the review was basically to identify the cost-saving interventions which have been applied in NHS and in all the NHS healthcare settings. So to identify the interventions basically which are based which are more on costsaving rather than efforts saving and rather than um timesaving. So more focus was to get the cost base reduced to 1% and we were focusing on cost savings. So um this was in line with the 10 10-year NHS health program which is basically to focus on three major shifts which is from take moving the care from hospital to the communities and like making better use of technology and focusing more on prevention of the illness rather than doing the treatments which would eventually help us focus on costsaving. So this was in line with the 10-year NHS health program. Okay. So how we kind of went about with the approach and the methodology for this review to design the evidence pipeline was we used Python as a coding language with Chad GPT 40 version for our pipeline. There are various there are very newer versions of Chad GPT available at the moment as well. But then charge uh C4 uh charge sorry 40 was chosen because it was it gave us more good performance the validation performance and it was cost effective as well for us. So it worked well in hand with what we were looking for. So that's why we chose GPT40 over the latest versions and we have used this basically to screen over 5,000 uh reviews as of now and then for in every stage basically we have we basically have seven stages where would where would pass all our papers and we would screen them through every stage like the first set of papers would go through stage one if it doesn't I can show you what the criterias were for us to screen and get to the reduced number which focused only on cost uh saving in the next slide but now I would like to tell you basically that we screen over 5,000 uh reference papers and we used like multi-stage screening which was like using tiered prompts and we kind of kept tweaking our prompts till we were happy with the accuracy performance um of of the model and we were actually trying to do manual interventions as well at each stage just to do the prompt twix but at the end stage where we need manual intervention. We needed somebody to review the papers manually and to see if um basically we got what we actually expected and which focused only on costsaving like the actual cost number. So okay I would like to show you what basically the evaluation criterias were across all the stages we had from stage one to stage 7 starting from the basic stage which was first was the papers should be included only if they are in English and if they are published in between 2019 to 2025. So automatically the papers which were published before 2019 were excluded from uh from our evidence. Stage two was basically if the papers were of UK study and applied to UK. The third the mo most obvious and most important was if they are basically part of the NHS if they are part of the health social care or community settings and like which included outpatients details and all of that stuff also had like GP settings and stuff like that. Uh stage four was basically we focused only on peer-reviewed or gray literaturial papers. We kind of excluded protocols and editorials specifically. Then we had must have comparators and like cost impact and clinical outcomes stage. Stage six was the stage which I basically uh explained before which focused on the three main shifts which was from health care moving the uh moving care from hospitals to communities moving from u from analog to digital basically making proper use of uh technology and third was focusing more on prevention rather than treating illness. And the last the last and which is the very important stage for us was basically the cash releasing benefit. the change that reduces actual spend and the budget on on the treatments. So it was not to focus on something which was time-saving which was not to focus on something which was effortsaving but more on cost-saving that that was the main goal of this review. Okay. I would like to now uh show you the sample prompt which we used for stage three. Stage three was basically for uh like you know which which were related to health and NHS kind of setting. So this was this is how our prompt looked like like you know um I will not explain line by line but I will just kind of go through main like you know it should have been NHS setting health and social care services or community health settings which for example it included hospitals like uh community clinics it also included like care homes and home health etc kind of stuff but it it excluded so we mentioned as an exclude criteria as well like pure laboratory schools and workplaces. Those kind of stuff were excluded from our review um from this and we got the JSON object and then these were explicit notes which we mentioned for us to like specifically to focus on if we wanted more focus on community health home care because we found that few papers were excluded when they should have been included which were not implicitly um which were implicit but not explicitly mentioned. So we kind of made some tweaks here and there just so that we could get our model to perform better. So this was uh these were b this was basically our sample prompt for that. Yes. And this is the confusion matrix from stage three. For example, uh let me talk about like true positives, true negatives and how we focus on that. Um so the confusion matrix before prompt refinement we had something which so we had someone as a manual reviewer as well for the for the stages we were passing and we just wanted to cross validate if we were doing the right thing and if the model was actually performing really well as per our expectations. So we had a manual reviewer where we felt that somebody would we would want somebody to intervene manually just to check how the model performance was. So uh there was a stage three where we kind of like had uh something which the manual review included was 16 but AUPIR exclude which is kind of a big number which API excluded and we found out that there were there were some specific things which were implicitly mentioned in the papers but not explicitly mentioned as for example healthcare not mentioned as outpatient like GP and like words like that specific keywords like that. So we that's that's how we made the tweick in the notes and we mentioned that look for this explicitly signals as well which was outpatient community healthcare home care home etc. So we made those changes in the nodes in our prompts just so to see the improvement in the model performance and surprisingly uh it went really well and the confusion matrix after the tweaks we did few couple of times we actually this was the final accuracy scores we got and we could see that the APR kind of excluded only five which was quite fair and it included majority of the papers we expected it to include. So obviously some prompt tweaks were required and some some prompt tricks were made just for our model to perform better and you could see the difference in our confusion matrix. So the accuracy improved as well from 64% to 88% whereas from precision was from 60% to 87%. So we were happy with this performance for us to go ahead and finalize this stage of evidence. Okay, let me show you the sample input and the output files from the AI. What we had um what we had provided as a input file to the AI was just which is if you can see on the top it just included the ID, the year of the publication, the title of the study and the abstract which described the study. So these were only the column this was this was basically the data fields we provided to the AI and what we in return kind of expected uh for AI for us to return was like if we should include in stage three or not. So it gave us like true or false uh and we could also see the reason. So we actually wanted a reason which would be within like um not more than 20 um statements and 20 characters. So we actually asked the AI to include the reason as well why the AI thinks we should include this paper in stage three. And then we detected the context as well like which keyword did it detect in the paper for us to kind of uh understand okay this is this is what community health paper is and we could include this in our stage. And we actually had the confidence stage as well which uh which we kind of expected between 09 to um one so that we were confident about the results of the AI model and this was how the input and the output from the AI looked like. Okay. Going on to next. Obviously accuracy was quite important as a as a metric for us to decide if the performance of the model is going really well. I would like to say in the earlier screening stages the accuracy level was more than 93%. But you could see that the stage one, two and three basically were kind of simple of just to understand if they were if the papers were in English, if the papers were published in 2019 to 2025, if they were UK based and if they were based on healthcare and stuff like that. So the earlier screening stages were quite easy and we could see that there was the accuracy was 93%. But in later stages obviously the complexity kind of increased and we were trying to find specific um like literature reviews where they could focus on the outcomes and the three major shifts and also which only included cost-saving um papers as well. So so the complexity of the model definitely increased that's why the accuracy kind of reduced to some level from 78% to 84%. So it it only confirms that AI is highly efficient for initial filtering. But we would need like a human expertise or interventions at the later stage just so that we could make some prom tweaks or we could kind of understand and make the AI model more like you know uh tweaks into the prom just so that they understand and make some explicit changes as per our requirement. So human intervention was needed at the later stages and then uh at the end we kind of scaled our model and we screened all the 5,175 papers and we tracked down just to kind of 186 papers which which actually met our final criteria which was to focus on the health uh sorry which was to focus on the costsaving uh interventions. So um this is how we used our model for that. Okay. Okay. This is the funnel which explains the whole subset was 5175 papers. The first stage kind of included only 51 and 41 but excluded rest of them. You could actually see in each stage how the number of papers kind of got reduced and kind of got excluded because it did not meet our criteria. And at the end if you see the NHS3 shifts we could only have 1041 and the costsaving or positive ROI the papers which focused on costsaving and positive ROI was 186 but okay at the end the business requirement was just to focus on the cost and the cash releasing benefits and we couldn't really find zero uh we couldn't really find any papers which would focus on that but our goal as a AI model performance was up till getting 86 papers. So this was this is how um the model performance looked like from stage one to stage seven at the end. Okay, let's talk about the impact significance and the key lessons learned. So obviously AI assisted reviews they are very fast they are kind of scalable they are cost effective and it is like how we we could use in our NHS settings just to go through hundreds and thousands of literature papers to get what we want. It was consistent as well. We could actually have the NHS specific criterias. It was scalable and it had the repeatable approach which aligned to the NHS priorities and which are actually suitable for how we would look to kind of do evidence mapping and like getting um our cost-saving benefits in our future. So this is what the impact and the significance of the model looked like and the review looked like. So the key lessons learned basically obviously AI helps us to speed up evidence mapping. AI helps us to speed up. It's very fast. It's quick, cost effective, it's reliable as well. Um, but we need human intervention at the end specifically when we are u very specifically looking for particular requirements in in this model review. We actually looked into costsaving finding the costsaving um papers. So this was very specific criteria. So we need human interventions at the later stage just so that we kind of um go through the performance and we are happy with the performance and the meth method is scalable and adaptable across different health and care topics. So we could actually make help and make use of AI assisted reviews which would be quite helpful and fast and quick compared to the traditional um way of reviewing the literature papers. Yeah, &gt;&gt; I've got to jump in now because you're literally at time and we said we'd run over by five minutes and that's exactly what we've done. So, &gt;&gt; okay. So, I have finished my presentation and I ask if there are any questions. So, &gt;&gt; there are lots of questions which we're not going to have time to cover but &gt;&gt; no worries. They can also drop me an email on my email that just mentioned and I can I'm happy to answer them via email as well. So, you should be fine. &gt;&gt; Oh, fantastic. So also they could get in touch with you with the chat on part of this um as part of this question. I'm going to just cheat and ask a question. Anyway, &gt;&gt; okay. &gt;&gt; We're into reproducibility, aren't we? We're into sharing stuff. If if we've spent the money on it in the NHS, let's share it and get it out there. So So it's possible with with this. &gt;&gt; Sorry, somebody else take what you've done and just use it. Sorry, I didn't quite I uh you kind of broke for me. I didn't quite understand your questions at the end. Yeah. C &gt;&gt; could is there a way &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; somebody could literally use what you've done in their work? Could is there a So, so we're into sharing things, aren't we? And &gt;&gt; yes, definitely. &gt;&gt; Yes. So, so is there a um is this been published or is there a document? I I'm just I'm asking a really &gt;&gt; no at the moment this was basically for our in-house project. So we have used this for for a particular project we were actually working together with. Uh but definitely I can have a conversation with my team and my u my colleagues to understand if we can share this model with other um NHS [clears throat] people where this can be very useful and helpful and I would really be grateful to do that. that would be really nice. Uh but I need to check with my team and my colleagues if that's really possible. &gt;&gt; Great. That would be wonderful if that happens. Um health economics unit is really important part of the NHS. So that would be brilliant. Um thank you so much everybody. I mean there's too many questions. We'll take them away. We'll share them with a but do get in touch with her because I think this was a really fascinating um um uh presentation. So thank you and have a nice cup of tea. &gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you so much, Karen. Thank you so much.