back again everybody. Uh so thanks for hanging on and bearing with me while I was introducing the wrong uh speakers last time. U so I will crack on. Our next uh speaker is Gaffrey Kumar who's a lead health economist at the health economics unit. Um she'll be speaking about calculating the cost of end of life care in the UK. So over to you Gaffrey. &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks Sean. Um so yeah hopefully everyone can see my slides. So to set the scene for this project we were commissioned by Mary Cury to estimate the public expenditure on people in the last year of life in the UK. Um so we did this in partnership with the Nfield Trust. Um so co-authors are just listed there. Um Lisa Cummins from the health economics unit was um leading the work on our side. Um so I'll just move on to the next slide. So as sort of seen setting um 650,000 adults die every year in the UK. The quality of their last year of life is greatly influenced by the care and support that they receive particularly from publicly funded services. Of those people roughly one in six die in poverty. And to compound that, the last year of life can be a time of financial hardship, particularly as many people might have to give up work while also facing increased costs associated with care and just being able to go about their daily activities. By 2035, it's predicted that there will be 13% more death more deaths. So the impact of this to public expenditure um really merited investigating. So the aim of this project was to conduct within a 4-month uh time period uh an analysis of public expenditure in the last year of life across healthare, social care and social security spending to inform current spending decisions. We chose to focus on um 2022 as the year of our study. Um given that this was just after co we felt like that reflected that was the most recent year for which we could identify more data um and felt that being after the worst of lockdown that um it would reflect activity on a general basis. We looked at the UK overall and um well look we built up the UK overall by looking at each of the four nations. So England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. We focused only on expenditure. We didn't look at the effectiveness of different paliotative care interventions or on um we didn't look at carer expenditure or impact on mental health. Um I'll go into more detail on the challenges and limitations but within the time frame there were um some data and evidence gaps and we had to rely on published and existing data from the literature um and as I mentioned this was um commissioned and funded by Mary Curry and we undertook this in collaboration with the Nfield trust. So in terms of our approach to this, we undertook an evidence review um which we iterated on throughout the course of the project and as well as engaging extensively with stakeholders in each of those sectors of healthcare, social care and social security. So we identified based on the literature and from stakeholders what specific components might be um in those sectors. Then we gathered the data and evidence that we could access within the time frame um of the project. Um and then we um developed a model incorporating sens probabilistic and deterministic sensitivity analyses to see what the impact of uncertainty to assess the level of uncertainty in the results. In terms of the headline figures um that our model generated, we estimated that 22.1 billion was spent in the UK um publicly on health care, social care, and social security for people aged 18 or older in their final year of life based on evidence dating to 2022. So for each of the 652,000 adults who died, that amounted to about 33.9,000 um pounds per p spent per person. In terms of how the public expenditure is distributed across those sectors in the UK, looking at the total UK figure, over half was spent on healthcare. So roughly 11.7 billion with almost uh 5 billion spent on social care constituting 22%. And then a quarter spent on social security payments. So just to break this down by sector um so the types of areas in of healthcare spend that we identified were spending on GP practice care delivered in GP practices hospital care um community and hospice care. Um so looking at how these sort of stack up you can see that hospital care um is by far the greatest driver of the results and in particular unplanned care in hospital which contributed more than half of the total health care spend followed by planned care in hospital. Um but as you can see the hospice care which tends to be the focus of policy discussions about end of life and paliotative care only constituted um well constituted a relatively small proportion 1.7% in outpatient community and 1.8% in inatient. Moving on to the next slide. In terms of social security, social sorry social care spend, we identified local authority fund um funded care um in the form of residential and nursing care and home care and other uh types of expense other types of local authority funded care. Um and then the other main component was continuing health care. So local authority funded care and in particular residential and nursing contributed the most of the social care spend. In terms of social security spend, we considered expenditure on people of people um in the last year of life of working age and those of pensionable age. So in the working age group um they were eligible for special rules at end of life. um for personal independence payments, attendance allowance, universal credit and carers allowance and housing benefit and um the pensionable age. So the state pension given to people in the last year of life is what contributed the majority of the total social security spend. So when you compare the different sectors of spending and then the largest drivers within those sectors you can sectors you can see that hospital care in total is um the biggest driver but in particular unplanned care in hospital um and yeah health care contributing more than half of the total public expenditure um sort of yeah shows how much of a driver that is in terms of the implications of our research. So we did identify large data gaps particularly with community services and social care um which we couldn't get access to um more granular data sets within the time frame of the project. So that would be an area for further research. Um furthermore, we couldn't I we didn't have the time um within the scope of the project to be able to link health, social care and social security data to deaths. So the majority of our um estimates were derived from what was in the published literature. Um next another limitation was that uh cost date we identified cost data that was not specific to the end of life. Um there is no dedicated source of unit cost data at end of life. Uh so that is a potential area for further research. Um we while we identified data sources from across the UK, there were gaps in specifically relating to the um four nations. So while we could identify nation specific cost data for England, Scotland and Northern Ireland um not we couldn't identify activity data across the board relating to those and so where there were gaps we had to use the nations that we had data for as proxies. Um and then finally we uh we know from the literature that um people at the end sorry people from um deprived communities are more likely to experience end of life care within hospital. Um and so that would be an area for further research to go more in depth into the to understand the inequalities and variation in location of care. Um and in terms of what the policy imple implications are of our work um essentially there's insufficient focus from policy makers on people at the end of life and actually this week a um a health select committee report was published that cited our work. So that shows the impact of our work and hopefully changes in the policy discussion around um end of life funding. Um but another question we have is what is going to change the predominance of hospital care? um not just with not just the end of life but I guess more broadly and hopefully with the focus in the 10-year plan that that could really sort of change the dial and help focus resources and ensuring a more comfortable um you know place of location of uh end of life care for for people. Um and finally, yeah, um looking into how inequalities at the end of life sort of affect the quality of care that people receive as well as um the public the burden on public expenditure. Um so yeah, I think I've reached the end of my 10 minutes, so I'll stop there. &gt;&gt; That was brilliant. Uh but a really really important um area uh to discuss. So we do have a question that's come through on the chat from Sarah Elliot. So does hospice care cost includes more than the bed based care? So for example, does it include visit to patients own homes and other support services like counseling? &gt;&gt; Um that is a good question. I don't have that off the can't recall off the top of my head just now, but I can put a link to um sorry, I can put a link to the report in the chat. Um and yeah, sorry, we'll just have to follow up on that and get back to you. &gt;&gt; That's fine. Um and oh well, how do I Sorry, I've forgotten how to take that down now. There you go. The other way there. Um I suppose I just had a quick question as well where we got a little bit of time. So do you have a sense of how much we spend I suppose to comparable other countries? I know this was UK based specific research but is there any sense or any literature you've seen on how we compare? &gt;&gt; Um no we didn't consider that in our um in our analysis. So I mean yeah that would certainly be um an area for future research comparing like do other countries still see that predominance of hospital-based care particularly unplanned hospital care um or you know is it what learnings can we take from other countries um but yeah unfortunately that wasn't something that we were able to compare in our analysis. &gt;&gt; No that's good. So, so is is there planning to be any any additional follow-up analysis of that kind of depending on the future funding streams I guess? &gt;&gt; Yes, that'll be dependent on the future funding streams. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thanks very much. Um, just checking if there any more questions. Um, but yeah, there's no no more questions. Uh, thanks very much for your time. It was really uh interesting uh talk and we will move on to the next uh talk next speaker.