And we've now got Michael Sykes uh who's vice chancellor's fellow and national audit improvement lead at North Umbrea University and national diabetes audits um with Dr. Bethan Popsy who's a princess principal medical statistician at the University of Leeds and they're going to be talking us through evolving national diabetes learning health system lessons from trials embedded within a national audit. So over to you. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much and thanks for the opportunity to to speak this afternoon. I'm just checking you can see my slides. Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. So in England 3.8 million people have diabetes. They are at risk of costly but more importantly lifealtering and lifehortening complications. to improve care for these patients. Um, the National Diabetes Audit provides feedback at a team system and national level. It's one of 60 national audits in England and like other audits, it provides additional support for improvement. I'm Michael Sykes. &gt;&gt; I'm Beth Py. &gt;&gt; Thank you, Bethan. seamless and and we'd like to describe our work if um in with an evolving national diabetes learning health system. The punchline for this talk will be two calls to action. First of all, that we should be ambitious in our integration of practice and research and secondly a question to services. Do you want to discuss using your routine data to evaluate improvements? If so, please get in touch with us. The use of randomization um to assess improvements as part of routine work isn't new. So the behavioral insights unit did work with the organ trans organ transplant service. And if you've applied for a driving license update recently, you may have seen a message like this. you'll actually receive one of these eight messages because what they did was they randomized who got which message and from doing so worked out the message seven which said if you need an organ transplant would you like to have one if so please help others would lead to about 96,000 more people registering so routine randomization helping them to identify what was the best way forward &gt;&gt; thank you for everybody for for bearing with us for that um so this was um different approaches that they they used to try to uh to support more people to register with the organ donation um registry. Um yeah, so we've taken some inspiration um from Langon Health in New York um who developed a learning health system um looking at targeting different things. Um so they look at lots of different things that people within the health service suggest. Um so one thing that they've looked at is um adding um to the reminder for um smoking sessation um prescriptions that it's um a billable service um in their reminder which has meant that um over 1,800 more people got these prescriptions. um or similar strategies looking at um discontinuing mailed reminders which saves them $25,000 um and using telephone outreach which meant that 392 more appointments were scheduled. So what we wanted to do is if we could could we similarly test different strategies to improve care. So what we're going to describe now is two trials that we've run with the national diabetes audit. The first is um looks at how you might increase the use of insulin pumps for people with type 1 diabetes. This has been nice recommended care since 2008. And yet today there are about 60,000 people with type 1 diabetes who are eligible according to NICE guidance but that don't use a pump. They're receiving care from about 140 specialist diabetes teams. That was in England and Wales. The second study, equip two, um looks at the care for young adults with type two diabetes. Um here the where what we find is young adults have a more aggressive phenotype that increases their risks. By coincidence, there are also about 60,000 young adults who have a blood glucose level above what NICE would recommend. They're receiving care from 6 and a half thousand general practices that are part of 1263 primary care networks. So looking at that first study first, what we wanted to do is to find out if we provide a quality improvement collaborative to those specialist diabetes teams, would it increase the use of insulin pumps. So we invited teams to take part, randomized them, half of them got part the quality collaborative now and half of them would get facilitation later. We sought to assess effectiveness, cost effectiveness and we did looked at the processes of of uh of implementation. So we uh 77 teams applied we randomized and what we did was to use routine delivery. So the quality improvement gravity was already going to be delivered and also routine data. So national audit data of outcomes that helped us um explore the data by um ethnicity, age, sex deprivation and we also conducted interviews, observations and documentary analysis to find out how it went. In equip two, we've been more ambitious or even more ambitious. Here we want to do is find out should we be providing primary care networks with webinars, with e-learning and email support or with facilitation later. Again, we explored effectiveness, cost effectiveness and processes. This time what we did was work permission to randomize all primary care networks in England. So a third of them got invited to webinars, a third of them got e-learning and a third of them will get facilitation later. The content of the webinars and the e-learning is almost identical. So it draws upon learning from high performing primary care networks, learning from young adults and help to identify so surgery to identify patients, best practice guidance and more. Again, we use routinely collected national audit data to assess the effectiveness of the interventions we were delivering and carried out interviews, observations, document analysis and surveys to find out how we went. I'll skip over this but that's the lodging model. Happy to talk about it later. So there were a number of of lessons from from this work. The first we'd like to highlight is how we aligned time scales. So there's a rough time scales for for the process starting in in January 24 when the National Diabetes Audit set the topic of young adults. We then worked with them to design the study and the interventions. We pulled together a funding bid that went in at the end of July. Alongside that, we had discussions with the health research authority. We got the good news about funding in January. We were then able to refine the interventions and undertake contracting and permissions. We randomized in April and start delivery in April. What I'd like to do is just kind of maybe contrast that with what would happened previously. So in the past the national diabetes audit would have set the um topic around October time. So about eight eight months earlier we' have designed interventions and done delivery. So there's a cost in time for the the national diabetes audit. On the other hand they get to find out more about whether they should be doing this again in future. Um so by conducting um the trial within NHS England um it gave us advantages in that um we had increased data security so data wasn't leaving the NHS England systems um which allowed us to um accommodate large data sets as well. Um there was a talk this morning by Ella who talked about um coffee and code sessions. Um and I think really echo the advantages of that of having um other researchers who were using the same data set brought a lot of benefits in terms of sharing code um and ideas about processes. and being able to use the routinely collected data meant that we could include more patients in our study um and have less work um for all of the um healthcare sites involved as well. Um we did have some unforeseen challenges um like always. Um so one of these was um looking at HBA1C measurement. So the um blood glucose measurement um there were some issues with um the laboratory devices that were used to assess this um in quite a few of the NHS trusts um that were included in the study. Um so we had to sort of um keep on top of this in terms of sort of having ongoing information and communication with the data providers about this. Um in the end we were able to conduct sensitivity analysis because it was um only right at the end um of our study period um where these issues started. Um so we could just chop out that bit at the end and see um what would have happened without that. Another challenge we had um was assigning patients to a specialist team. So within um the National Diabetes Audit, specialist teams submit manual returns um with um the patients who are under their care and their data. Um however we found that about half of the patients in the National Diabetes Audit weren't assigned to a specialist team. Um so we conducted two analyses in the end. So, one with the data that was provided using the manual returns and then we also um used HEZ data, hospital episode statistics um to try to match people with where they'd received their most recent outpatient appointment um and assumed that um that was the team that they'd been seen by. There were obvious clear differences between the two studies um which I'm going to go through very briefly which is one we recruited teams first of all and then randomized in the other one we got permission to randomize them all um there the implications from this about kind of permissions about which ones reflect real life and I suggested the latter one more so there were complications for power we can get into and also fit with ways of working but conscious of time I'm going to move on to the next slide if that's right Bethan because there's a risk that we talk about the technical side and actually this has really been more relational work. Um, it's really involved a strong collaboration between NHS England, the National Diabetes Audit, Diabetes UK and researchers, each of whom share common curiosity and improvement goals. They've each been tolerant of disruption to their their processes and it and and it's also involved the development of trust. We needed to believe it was possible, but also really importantly, there was equipoise. That's this idea that we've been providing quality improvement collaboratives for a long time, but we don't know that they're better. So we should find out whether they're better or not by comparing them against not providing them. And so that equipoise issue is a key element to the to the process. As said this wouldn't be able to happen without a large number of people many of whom are named here and very grateful to the funer. But what I want to close with is those calls to action. So, first of all, um we really should be ambitious in how we integrate practice and research because it's the only way that we will continue to get incrementally better by knowing whether what we've done is better than what we had before. And the other is we're doing this with one set of routine data and one set of routine intervention delivery. If you're doing similar work or you'd like to discuss what we've been doing, we'd really really like to hear from you. Thank you very much and apologies for the technical issues at the beginning. No, thank you both. And uh and yeah, thank you for persevering with us while we got that sorted. Um we're going to we're going to need to um to move to uh to our break now. But but if for as for um with Michael and Bethon and with all of our speakers, if you want to reach out to them, uh you can do using the people uh tab in the um in the program. So please do reach out to them directly. Any questions on that that brilliant talk. Thank you both uh so much for that today. Um so we're going to go to a short break now. Um we'll be coming back in promptly at um 3:35 for the final session uh of Hacker 2025 around improving flow. So hopefully see you there