Hello, Rana. How you doing? &gt;&gt; Hi. Thanks for having me. I'm good. Um, okay. Have I got my slides up? So, hi everyone. My name is Rana. I'm a F2 doctor at the Royal Free Hospital. Um, at the time of the audit, I was an F1 in trauma orthopedics at the North Middle Sex Hospital. Um and today I'll be presenting our order that showed um our virtual fracture clinic improving the British orthopedic association standards for trauma compliance, patient outcomes and um it showed that I delivered cost savings in a low socioeconomic area. Um okay so overview I'll just be going over um why we did the audit our baseline data um going through the virtual fracture clinic performance our methods results after the implementation and some of the challenges that we identified and our recommendations. Um so in terms of background um North Sex Hospital is part of the North Central London integrated care system. It serves a population with very high um deprivation and significant language barriers. Um and the face-to-face fracture clinic faced substantial pressures. Um the clinics were essentially overcrowded. We were often seeing more than 100 patients per day. We had multiple referral uh streams. So referrals coming in from ED um urgent elective cases, ward discharges, on call referrals, and um unscheduled walk-ins. Um so this created a lot of unpredictable demand. Um there was also difficulty in meeting our um boast guidelines. Um so our post guidelines state that we should be seeing patients within the 72 hours of presentation for a soft tissue injury or a bony injury. Um and you can appreciate that this created a lot of inconsistent care um and significant overcrowding. Um, another thing that we wanted to look at this audit was if um, patient leaflets were being given um, to patients um, and they were not and often they were only available in English. So in terms of what are the um, boast guidelines, these are standards of care that patients should expect following an acute soft tissue or bone injury. Um, and these standards can be audited to evaluate the quality of our outpatient fracture clinics. Um so some of the things we were looking at is making sure patients were seen within the 72 hours of presentation of injury, making sure our um clinics were consultant. Um and also making sure that we were providing the patient leaflets to the um patients. Next slide please. Um so in 2024 um the facetoface fracture clinic um which is our outpatient orthopedic clinic um it frequently had more than 100 patients being booked per day. Um on average that worked out to be 72 patients per working day that we were seeing. Um and this made flow unpredictable and placed a lot of heavy pressure on both clinical and administrative staff. Um our 2024 data shows that we had 29% um discharge rate for our new attendances and 9.8% of our new patients that were seen in clinic required surgery. So although although on average we were seeing 72 patients per day um if we look on this graph individ on there were some days where patients were booked um where the appointments were um exceeding 100 patients uh per clinic day. So a major finding that we had was 37.4% 4% of patients were breaching the 72-hour target. Um, and 66% of these patients were non-wooking patients. Um, average weight for a plan review was 5.5 days and this reflected capacity problems rather than clinical complexity. Um, our DNA rates were also a significant issue. So, 23.5% um, DNA rates for our new face toface um, appointments and then 30% for our follow-ups. Um and these high DNAs reflect you know reduced efficiency and contributed to a lot of um wasted clinic capacity. Next slide. So what we proposed to um implement um was a virtual fracture clinic um and this was designed for acute orthopedic injuries that could be safely managed non-operatively. Um so what this involves is we have referrals coming in um and a consultant and a&amp;p will review the images and referral details remotely. Um decisions are made within 72 hours and communicated to the patient. Um so either they have a clear discharge plan um or they're brought back face to face for a review. um patient leaflets and exercise sheets were um provided at the time of the referral and our goal with this was to reduce the unnecessary face toface attendance um and improve clinic flow um next slide please. So the main reasons for introducing a virtual service was that we know this can reduce the demand on secondary face to face care. Um as it's been done before and these are just some articles um stating that um our main reason for introducing the VFC was to improve our compliance, reduce our face toface clinic congestion, reduce walk-ins um and uh DNAs. So in terms of the number of patients we will see in our virtual fracture clinic um we've um stuck to 25 patients. That's because the BMA advises that around 25 patient contacts per day is a safe limit in primary care. Um and we've tried to reflect this. Um this number is conservative but it reflects our demand. Um so this was a retrospective closed loop audit that we did. Our baseline data was from January to December um in the year 2024. Um we introduced the VFC in February and then we collected data in March. Um so the VFC ran from February to March and then we collected the data um for the virtual fracture clinic and the facetoface um virtual fracture clinic as well. During that time um data was provided to us by the informatics team at North Middle Sex Hospital and we also used the national cost collective index to calculate the cost avoidance um from VFC discharges um and the reduced follow-up burden. So in terms of the virtual fracture clinic this ran over 5.2 weeks um and as you can see referrals were pretty consistent averaging 18 um per day. So in total we had 484 referrals over the 5.2 weeks. Um and 32% of these patients were discharged safely with advice. Um and 68% of these patients required escalation to a face-to-face review. So discharge rates were higher in the VFC compared to the face-to-face clinic. Um and this reflects our improved efficiency of patient management. um patients that were seen in the virtual fracture clinic were less likely to require surgery than those that were seen in the face-to-face clinic and this reflects our improved patient triage. So in terms of comparing our attendances um for our facetoface clinic before the VFC um and after the VFC you can see that total face tof face attendances fell by 21% um follow-ups fell by 29% um new patients decreased by 4% um and walk-ins reduced by 8% and this reduction made the clinic more predictable and less congested. So in our facetoface clinic before the VFC, the DNA rate was 23.5% for our new patients and this dropped to 8.3%. Um and the DNA rate for our follow-ups was 30% and this decreased to 17.6% post implementation of the VFC. Um and this is because patients received clear communication and appropriate appointments. Next slide. So our boast compliance improved significantly. Um so breaches fell from 37.4% to 14.4% and that's a 61% relative reduction. [snorts] Average weight for a clinical review reduced to 2 days. Um so that's an improvement by 3.5 days um for our new patients and this is one of the strongest indicators of improved um safety and flow. Next slide. So this slide shows on the day waiting times um how long patients waited after arriving for their face tof face appointment. Waiting times did increase in February um 2025 compared to February 2024. Um and we've proposed three key reasons for this. So the complexity of the patients that we were seeing in our facetoface clinic increased. Um there were some data discrepancies. So we had some missing data points for our waiting times. Um and the there was a short post intervention period. So in terms of our projected cost savings, we use the national cost collective to work out the cost savings. Um so direct cost savings from a virtual fracture clinic um discharges over the 5.2 weeks was just over £10,000 and we extrapolated this for 252 uh working days and we the VFC um discharges saved us just over £100,000 per year. So we improved patient communication by providing them multilingual leaflets. Um we made them available in over 100 languages. Um we introduced QR codes for easy access, printed copies for those that needed them. Um and we set out VFC um expectations. Uh we set out sorry um VFC was explained to set clear expectations. Um and this greatly supported our diverse patient population. So some of the key challenges so not all patients were suitable for VFC. Um we had a few inappropriate referrals. Um and this in initially increased the workload on our on call team. Um this was a short VFC study period and we did acknowledge that we had some missing waiting time data. To overcome some of these challenges while the VFC was running, we introduced posters um in the uh A&amp;E department for quick referencing and decision-m with pathways and clear guidelines. Um for patients with a language barrier, we booked them for a facetoface clinic appointment or we use DA language line. um while we phone them and we also um organized multiple drop-in sessions to familiarize the ED staff in terms of the criterion referral pathways. So in conclusion, our virtual fracture clinic significantly improved our post compliance. Um it reduced walk-ins and clinic congestion. It reduced DNAs, delivered substantial cost savings, improved efficiency and flow, and it worked effectively in a high deprivation multilingual um population. Overall, the VFC is a safe and efficient sustainable model. Our future recommendations um next slide, sorry. So, we would recommend reducing our planned face-to-face clinic volume. Um we would um focus the virtual fracture clinic on new cases only. Um, we'd provide ongoing staff education for consistent referral pathways. Um, and we hope to perform a longer duration reit to assess the long-term performance. Next slide. And then next slide. Um, thank you. I'm happy to take any questions um and feedback. &gt;&gt; All right. Thanks, Ria. That was uh super interesting. And yeah, we've got a few got a couple of questions coming in. So, we've got a question from Josepha. What which online platform did you use for your BFC? &gt;&gt; Um the online platform um so we used um we have a integrated we have a care system called Careflow. Um I'm not sure if that's answered the question. Um I was at F1 at the time so I think the consultants or the AMP who ran at the clinic probably um answer that question better but essentially patients were referred their um they would have all the information available on their clinic list. So the admin staff would book them onto a clinic um and then they would just go through the histories, the imaging um and then kind of propose a plan. Patients would be called. So it's like a face toface clinic, but essentially it's um it's done over the telephone and then they dictate a letter and essentially send it out to the GP and the patient. You hope that answers the question. &gt;&gt; Thanks Ra. I think Phil might um be having a slight technical difficulty. So, um I'll just say um thank you so much. I just haven't uh you'll have to remind me perhaps of the question that's just been asked. Um uh because we've got a few more in here, but we've only got one more minute. So, I'm going to uh what was the question? Sorry, that was just that you've just answered. Ra &gt;&gt; uh about what platform um the V was running? &gt;&gt; We've got a question here. So what do you think um contributed to the reduction in surgery when the patient was seen in the virtual fracture clinic versus when it was done face to face? &gt;&gt; Um sure. So um when patients came in um through A&amp;E um &gt;&gt; can anyone hear me? &gt;&gt; Yeah we can hear you Phil. Um yeah so when patients came in through sorry [laughter] &gt;&gt; that's fine. We had a set criteria of what patients met the requirement to go into the virtual fracture clinic and what patients require met the criteria for the encore team to be bleeped. Um for wounds that potentially may require surgery, open wounds or kind of displaced fractures or complex kind of injuries. Um they were all to be um fed through to the on call team. Um for you know stable fractures, injuries that could be managed non-operatively um those were kind of channeled through to the VFC. Um so seeing that there was [clears throat] less people were requiring surgery the um the the ones that were seen in the VFC just means that we had um improved patient triage at the point of when the patients presented. &gt;&gt; Fantastic. Thanks Ronnie and sorry I just dropped off from there my internet cut out. Um excellent. We're out of time for questions now but hopefully Ronnie you're still around for the rest of the day if people want to message you. Um, so do as ever with all the speakers, get in touch, keep the conversation going. That's the thing which was amazing last year in person. Then we can do our best with it this time online. So do you know people always like to talk about the good work they've done. So thanks again Ronnie. That was that was really interesting. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Thanks for having me. Thanks. Bye.