And I'm delighted to introduce our first speaker who is Sarah Lucas who is a health care analyst from the strategy unit who will be talking about quantifying categories of potentially mitigatable hospital activity to support health care planning. Um just can see Sarah's just joining. Thank you. Um so and and I'm going to say this to all the speakers. We are going to try and keep to time, but just a reminder for everyone um if you can post questions in the Q&amp;A and there is a facility to vote and upvote the ones that you're those questions that you're particularly interested in. But at that point, um I will hand over to Sarah. Okay. Thank you. Um so hopefully my slides will be uh coming up. Um but yeah, today I'm going to be talking um about some work that I've done alongside Anna Ferguson and Justine Wshshire um in the strategy unit looking at a potentially mitigable activity. So obviously there's this current focus on shifting care from acute hospitals um into community settings and this all assumes that there are subsets of hospital activity that can be mitigated that can be avoided um either through greater use of existing community services or through new services. So for the new hospitals program demand and capacity model, the strategy unit um has actually developed 92 categories of hospital activity um that could be defined as potentially mitigable. Um and measuring the rates um of this potentially miticable activity can give us an indication of whether hospital activity is being avoided and is being moved um to community services because obviously it's not possible for us to directly measure um avoided hospital activity. that's just an unknown. Um so with this work um we aim to inform health care planning um through understanding the scale of potentially mitigable activity to help inform prioritization. So um what areas are there high volumes of activity that might be a good target. Um we also wanted to track trends to indicate whether there had already been any shift away from hospital care or to at least provide a baseline um to compare to going forward. And also we wanted to do some comparative analysis to have a look to see are there areas that are doing things better than others where perhaps there's opportunities for us to learn um from what they're doing. So, of the 92 uh categories of potentially mitigable activity, um we've looked at 29 of those and those are ones that are focused on hospital inpatient activity and moving that um using community services. So, um this activity can be divided um into kind of four um broad uh categories based on the mechanism by which we think mitigation of activity could occur. So we have a redirection and substitution um group um and so this is activity where we think um some of the hospital activity could be avoided by moving it to community services. It includes admissions for frail older people, ambulatory care sensitive admissions, um medicines related admissions. Um and then we also have a prevention group. Um this is more um public health uh focused. So around public health initiatives around smoking, obesity, alcohol, those kind of things. And then we have a group that are um relocation and efficiencies. So that's basically virtual wards. And then our last group is efficiencies. So these are a little bit different to the other groups. Um the other groups we're thinking about um potentially avoiding admissions and therefore reducing bed days. However, with efficiencies, we don't think the admissions could be avoided, but what we think is that actually length of stay could be potentially reduced and we get a reduction in bed days for efficiencies. Um, and there's a couple of key things um that we kind of need to bear in mind with our analysis that is that the categories um are not mutually exclusive. Sorry, are mutually exclusive. So what it means is that somebody could um have an admission that falls into an ambulatory care sensitive um category could also fall into a smoking category and maybe also um an acute respiratory um category as well. So we can't just sum up the activity um in total um otherwise we'll end up with double counting. Also um not what we're saying with this is not all of the activity within these categories can or should be avoided. So these are quite broad categories. They include a lot of activity. They're some of them are very high volumes. What we're saying is that potentially a proportion of the activity um within each of these um categories uh could be uh reduced. So in practice that may say 10% or something like that. So what we've done is we've produced um an online report. Um my colleague uh Anna is going to post the link in the chat. Um because basically it's a really big report. There's loads of data in there and so I can only touch on a few kind of key um points today. Um obviously there's pages for each of the 29 categories of potentially miticable activity and there's several summary pages um in that as well. Um, so what I'd say is if this is something you're interested in is to go and actually have a look at the report. Um, because there's a lot in there. Um, it includes descriptive analysis to give you a bit of an idea about who it is that's in each of these um, categories. It also in uh, includes cohort overlap analysis um, to help um, understand um, which of those categories are overlapping and the degree of overlap between them. and also some comparative um and trends analysis. And I'm just going to give you a kind of high level overview of a few of the bits of comparative and trends analysis that we've got today. So starting off looking at um trends. So nationally um hospital activity is uh reducing for end of life care. So if we look over the last uh five years we can see that the number of admissions um to hospital for end of life care has reduced by 23%. Suggesting that there has been some shift um away from hospitals more towards caring for patients at home or in hospices. However um for a lot of the categories um of activity we're actually seeing increases. Um on this slide I'm actually showing bed days. Um and we can see for chronic ambulatory care sensitive conditions there's been a 19% increase in bed days um in the last uh 5 years for acute alcohol-related ad um bed days a 35% increase and then for admissions of frail older people um with high frailty risk um there's been a 10% increase in bed days. So I'm going to focus um on this uh uh frail older people category um and show you some of the breakdown for that. Um so this data is um the most recent year of data that we have. So it's 2023 24 and it's looking at the variation um in bed days for frail um older people um admissions by ICB. So this is using age and sex standardized rates uh per 100,000 of the population and you can see there's considerable variability um between the different ICB areas um in the rates. So not only can we look at what's you can look in the report at what's there is for the current year but also in changes over time. So here um we're showing uh change in hospital activity um for fail older people over the last five years. So on the left is admissions um and you can see here that the England average there's been about a 1% increase in uh admissions for frailty um but considerable variability between the ICB areas. So some areas are seeing a much larger increase. Other areas are actually seeing a decrease. So here I've just highlighted Cornwall and the aisles of Silly. They've actually had a 23% reduction um in admissions over the last five years. Um, if you have a look at bed days, so as I mentioned earlier, bed days have actually increased nationally by about 10%. You can see here there's a lot more of the ICBS are seeing increases in bed days. In fact, Cormal and the Isles of Silly despite having a large reduction in admissions. They actually have an 8% increase in bed days. So still below the national average. Um, but they are seeing an increase. Although there are a few areas here again that have managed to uh decrease their bed days. So given this kind of um what we slight difference in what we see in terms of admissions and bed days that made us then start to think okay what's happening in terms of length of stay. So we have done a little bit of work within the report on length of stay um as well. So uh on the left is a chart showing the national trends um for frail uh older people um broken down by the different lengths of stay. So you can see for the shorter lengths of stay so kind of those the red orange and yellow lines that are for under a week um the proportion of those for fail older people is actually falling. However, for longer lengths of stay, what we're seeing um is for one to two weeks and two weeks plus in the blue and purple lines, we're actually seeing an increase over the last 5 years in those longer lengths of stay. And again, we've broken it down by ICB. So here you can see this time it's showing average length of stay. Um so the England average length of stay um has increased by about 8% but again obviously there's considerable variability um between areas um in terms of the changes that they've seen. So I should say that we focus mainly in the report on um ICBS in terms of breaking it down. Um but we do also have data in the report um at local authority level and also at provider level as well. So you can look at all of this at those levels as well. So um in conclusion some kind of high level points from the report are that we are starting to see shifts away from hospital care for some categories of potentially imiticable activity. So for example for end of life care however for many categories of potentially act uh potentially miticable activity hospital care is actually increasing. So like I've shown for high frailty chronic ambulatory care sensitive conditions and acute alcohol related admissions those in particular um are increasing. Um we also see considerable variability between areas. Um in terms of the rate of activity and in changes over time and also for some activity we are seeing these trends towards increasing length of stay. So obviously there is this balance there between um trying to reduce admissions but also balancing that with reductions in length of stay as well. Um, I would say really the key take-home point is if if this is something that you're interested in is to go and have a look at the report because there's obviously a lot more there and you can focus in on anything that you're particularly interested in. Um, really it's been designed to try and help ICBS and providers to understand um where there's opportunities to reduce impatient activity and the scale of those opportunities. Also to provide an opportunity to identify those systems that are kind of higher performing. So potentially others can learn from what they might be doing. And also um we're hoping it will help inform decisions about the potential of shifting uh funding from acute services more into primary and community care. Um so thank you for listening. I'm happy to take any questions. Um again I've just popped up the link um to the report. Also the GitHub repo as well is open if you want to have a look at the code. Thank you. That's brilliant. Thanks, Sarah. Can you hear me, Sarah? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Fantastic. Um, uh, so, and you've kept beautifully to time. Thank you. Um, there was, uh, there was a question in the in the I think we just got time for probably one question. There was one question in the chat about the definition of frailty, but I think Anna has already answered that one. Um, so we'll pick up there. There was a question from uh David Lewis asking sort of really interesting sort of what other uh potentially avoidable areas could you suggest that people look at? I don't know whether you've you've sort of considered that as part of your analysis. Um so obviously we've got these 29 kind of thing categories in here but there are also obviously these a whole other load of categories that have been um developed. And I think there's there's probably more work on trying within these categories of trying to define them a bit more clearly. So at the moment they are very broad and actually there is probably something about taking those and thinking okay maybe it's can we define a subset of those a bit more closely because obviously it's only a proportion that could be reduced and there is the risk of it getting lost a little bit in the noise um if they are bored. &gt;&gt; Brilliant. Thank you. Uh there there's I'm afraid we probably aren't not have time to take the second question, but Sarah, presumably you're around in Hacker if if people want to follow up with you and and obviously there's the um the report on the website, but uh that's it was an absolutely fantas presentation. Thank you very