Hello everyone. Apologies for that. Just a slight technical hiccup, but we are back and ready to go. Uh, and very excited to introduce our next uh, speakers who are William McConnell, who's a consultant respiratory physician at Dorset County Hospital, and Paul Wilding, who's a business intelligence partner at the NHS. and they're going to be presenting on turning insight into action using data to improve asthma outcomes in Dorsit. And I believe William and Paul are ready to go. &gt;&gt; Great. Yes. Lovely. Thank you so much. It's great to be here. Um so what we want to do is to talk about how clinicians like me uh are working with people like Paul who are interested in data um to to start making a difference. And so what we've been doing is we've been doing this for the last few years of trying to look at data in asthma and trying to improve our asthma outcomes. So this is where we started from. This was the uh I'm I'm one of the leads for respiratory in the southwest of England, NHS England. And what I've known for the last 10 years or 15 years from the NHS Atlas variation is that mortality for asthma was worse where I'm from in Dorset um than uh it is in the other ICBS in in the southwest and we're worse than the England average. You can see there and that had been going on for uh 15 years or so. But I didn't know what to do with it. I didn't know how to change it or how to make it better until we uh developed DICE, the Dorset Insight and Intelligence Service, a database of uh of uh that allowed us to do some population health management. So, and so what I've learned since 2018 since we've had this this um the uh this database is how powerful data can be to improve care. So, but there data on its own doesn't work. You can have data like we have. Um, but you also need leadership. So, you need that data to feed the leadership, the strategy, the priorities. Um, and to have a leadership group that can then act on the data and then look back on it and see whether you've made any difference to PDSA cycles and then but you need access to an army of people who are going to make the difference to the workforce essentially. And so what we've got is is 18 primary care networks in Dorset and each of them has a respiratory champion, a practice nurse who can uh look at the data and we can can be guided by us to what they need to do. Can now &gt;&gt; okay can you say do you want to say something about dice Paul? Um yes so um yes so I'm Paul Walding I'm one of the business intelligence partners within the DICE the intelligence insight service um so DICE itself is a linked health and social care platform that provides insights across the DOSA ICS it contains uh a dedicated data engineering analytical and data science specialist teams we all work together with our partners across the whole of the DOSA ICS that includes healthcare local authorities emergency services, voluntary sector. So, we're bringing in data from all of the different touch points and systems and services around the county. This is all hosted in a secure online platform um that provides that holistic overview of the Dorset population. And while we are NHS hosted, it's a system tool. So, it gives those across ICS insights and it allows our users to consider the whole Dorset population and not just the population that they serve or that they're working with specifically. Um the DICE data is pseudonmized to to keep it anonymous. Um and it can provide insights at various different levels. So we can look at the top level. So at ICB level, PCN level surgeries down to individual person levels. Um and so today's presentation with my colleague Will um on here is going to demonstrate how he was able to utilize this level of data to be able to call on those evidence-based insights from this level of information to achieve better health and well-being outcomes for our population. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much, Paul. Um and so and so we've used all we used the database for all of these things that I've can see in front of you. to see what where the variation exists. We've been able to look at trends over time and which will adjudge the effectiveness of what we can do. And we've been making associations saying if we if we increase this in inhaler use will that is that likely to make an an improvement and look at associations like that and predict future demand. So you can then put in business cases to say well if we do this spend a bit of money over here it's likely to have this sort of benefit and then from the workforce point of view it's really useful to reidentify those pseudonmized numbers into NHS numbers at the primary care network level so they can start doing the work and changing patient care. So this is uh one of our metrics for asthma which is quite important which is the over reliance that some people with asthma have on their blue inhalers their salutamol uh short acting beta 2 agonists and what we don't want is them using more than six of these inhalers a year. We want them to be using their preventative inhaled steroids instead. And what's happened um over the last three years, this is national data looking at where we were in 2022 and 2025, is that there's been improvement uh in all of the regions of England in terms of SAR use, but the biggest improvement is in the southwest of England, which is where we're based um and where we've now the best performing in the country from this particular mech. So that's great. Um and uh we have to remember that SAR use is linked to uh mortality which is a lot I was talking about earlier. If we look down at the seven ICBS within the southwest we can see it varies quite a bit. Here's the uh Cornwall where they're they do overuse SARS quite a bit. 23 20 down to 19% of their patients are over are using six or more SARS a year and other places everywhere is improving but there are two places that are improving faster than others. Glostersha here which is improving quite significantly so it's one of the best ICBs in England for this uh and and this is Dorset where I'm from and we're getting better quite quickly but we're never meeting GlTSA which is a bit irritating uh but it's not a competition but we would like to be better than Gloucester. So anyway so we're going to we're trying to that's what we've managed to do over the last few years. question is how have we done it and we've used it done it the thing that Dr. Glouester and Dorset have got we both got networks of respiratory clinicians with leadership we've both got data sets that we can look at and we both got access to the workforce and that's what we've got that those other ICBs haven't and this is our DICE uh it's one of my favorite DICE pages uh looking at our asthma treatments and this is what we call Sara overuse. This is people with six or more SARS. So you can see um the majority of people 30% of people don't use SABS at all. Uh and then 12 or more this is terrible asthma control uh so 2.5% are using 12 more and these are inhaled steroids. So these are the preenter inhalers. So what we want is is for the SA used to be down here and the inhaled steroid used to be up here and but there's a distribution. Um and then linked to that we've got this. And so this is our uh respiratory admissions for our asthma population. Uh and you can see that um you know that we're talking about uh in in uh in in whole of Dorset about 60,000 people with uh asthma. And so if you're talking about 2% that's still quite a lot of people. So those are asthma admissions. And here we can see prediscolone prescriptions. So that's a predinisolone is the steroid tablets that we use when people exacerbate their in their asthma and we try and prevent that people from needing these things because that's a marker of poor control by using inhaled steroids instead. So that's that's our page and the other thing we've been able to do is produce a benchmarking page which Paul has been great at doing and and so it enables us to see what the trend over time is. This is six savers across the whole of Dorset. And we've for the last 3 years we've been falling from 17% down to um about 10%. And you can see across the 18 primary care networks that some are doing really well down here in terms of their SAR overuse. So this is some of my favorite primary care networks down here. And these are the ones that I'm not so keen on that are over here who um who are who have yet to do the work to reduce their SAR overuse. But en that enables us to then compare these areas and they're all falling by 2% um apart from this one which can't get any lower than 1.2% use of salutron. Um and this is what that that primary care network that I showed you that was the best performing. This is what it did. So three two two three two three two three two three two three two three two three two three two or three years ago it did some real intense work in the primary care network to reduce SAR use and improve patients overall asthma care and you can see that they did brilliant work getting themselves down to 1.4% and it's getting even lower. is continuing to drop as they're getting people from the old-fashioned way of managing asthma. We use blue inhalers to more modern treatment where they don't have blue inhalers and they use inhaled steroid inhalers containing inhaled steroids to control their asthma and there's lots of interventions that they did in order to to to produce that change that improvement. So if we now compare our best performing primary care network which is this one here and now that's got one of these respiratory champions. So it's got a it's got a a a nurse in that primary care network who can do this work. And at the time we had a full-time respiratory champion. This primary care network is one of the least wellp performing and it didn't have a respiratory champion. So they'd almost eliminated SAR use in their primary care network. Most people had no SARS at all and correspondingly they had a shift in their inhaled steroid use upper better more at at the right hand side. This less well performing PC uh they hadn't shifted their sour overuse at all. They had inhaled steroid use which was much less. And if we look at admissions to hospital far fewer you're talking about 1.8% 8% of the asthma patients being admitted to hospital compared to 3.8 so over half the number of admissions to hospital the rate of hospital admission from this primary care network presumably because we're managing asthma better and hopefully that's the reason but also a reduction in predinisone prescriptions. So that's nice to see comparing those two polar extremes of the of performance and indeed there is significant variation in the uh uh in the over and this is hospital admissions for asthma and this is the one that where that that I just showed you 1.3% but the the other primary care network that we uh showed you is somewhere around 3% uh admission rate so it varies quite a And what we're able to do is to show significant correlations between if you in had high SAR use on this axis, you tended to have higher respiratory admissions and if you had lower inhaled steroid use, you tended to have higher respiratory admissions. And there's a reasonably strong correlation there of R squared value of 0.5 or so. But what was more convincing because of course the key thing is is this causal? Is this a causal relationship? The thing that's most convincing really is if you look at change. So if you look at the places where we managed to reduce SAR did they have fewer asthma admissions associated with that. So what over the last few years there's actually been a slight rise in asthma admissions since COVID because COVID led to a quite a dramatic fall in asthma admissions but they've been creeping up since then but not everywhere. If you manage to reduce your SAR use like this primary care network did by 12% uh then your admission rate didn't go up whereas those uh places where that didn't um touch their SAR but overuse didn't manage to control their asthma better didn't manage to they had a rise in asthma admissions and that's a reasonably strong correlation isn't it? So we've got we seem to have a a a chronological cause which association which implies causation and we reckon that if all of Dorset was as good as the best primary care network then we would be able to prevent a thousand asthma admissions per year and that would potentially save one a.5 million pounds a year. So it's worth doing. That's great and it's great that we've used data in order to improve care and it's an ongoing piece of work. Of course, what's happened to our mortality? Remember where we started? Dorset's mortality was worse than previous than than all the other ICBs in the southwest were. This is more up to date. So, that data just went up to 2019. The data since then has been quite encouraging. So here we were toddling along at three and a half uh deaths per 100,000 of population, but we've dropped since we started doing all this sort of integrated proactive work. We seem to have dropped and continued to have a a lower asthma mortality rate. So potentially saving, you know, uh maybe about uh 20 or 30 lives a year uh compared to what we were doing before. And we've joined the rest of the Southwest, I'm pleased to say. So um we're getting closer to Gstershare because of course they're the ones we've got to beat though it's not a competition of course. So population health management it embraces these three priorities very linked to the government's priorities prevention from hospital community prevention and analog to digital and data will is really key to this alongside leadership team working knowing your workforce and accessing the workforce and we were able to access up-to-date data that data is updated every day um to so that we could then identify various creation and see the effects of our interventions and show that link that to reduced admissions and it's associated with reduced mortality though I'm always hesitant to say it's a causal relationship um but it seems likely that there's a link to improving care and reducing deaths. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you William. Um that's really interesting presentation and apologies for the the technical difficulties there at the beginning. Um thank you so much. I'm afraid we're we're going to have to move straight into the next presentation um just because we need to make sure we finish on time. But as always um William and Paul will be in the people list. Please uh do direct questions about that brilliant presentation to