So, welcome everyone to our Hacker 2025 Hubilo platform support drop in session. And this is this is for presenters, co-presenters. Uh, and in today's session, you're going to meet the the hacker planning team. You've kind of met half of us already. And find out everything you need to know to make your hacker experience one to remember. And that's obviously in a in a good way. and we'll try to answer as many questions as you have as well. Anything hacker related preferably. Um, and you can see what we're covering in the agenda. I think Matt Chair, could you share the agenda? We could just leave that on while I just finish off with my my intro so people can see what's coming up as well. Thank you. So, we are recording today's session and you can watch it back later. So hello if you're watching this on recording right now and uh we'll share a link to the recording with your presenter support pack after today's session. So you'll feel fully equipped and confident when you turn up on the day and that's just in a in a couple of weeks. I can't believe that. So welcome everybody and it's great to see so many of you and let's get started by meeting the hacker planning team. I don't think we've got a slide for this. So, I'll just I'll just say who we are. Uh that's me, Rachel. I'm part of the team. I'm also an analyst in the strategy unit and I also lead the Midlands analyst network. So, you might have seen me hanging out there. Uh we have Mimmuda who is our who is our comm's lead and we uh I think we've got some pictures of us later. And of course, you will meet us during the session today anyway. And uh and would all fall apart without the support from Natasha and Mache who you'll meet in a moment. And of course our hacker lead is here too. Hopefully he might not be. And that is of course Chris Beely who also heads up the data science team in the strategy unit. So that's us. Now if you would be so kind, could you please introduce yourselves in the chat and tell me how snuggly warm you are or maybe you're experiencing this rather cold snap. So just say where you are and what the weather's weather's like. So I'm in Stafford and it's rather chilly. uh my my daughter who's got her A-level PPEs this week or mocks as I call them. So, show me age. That's uh this week. Um I've got a flat tire. Not it's not personal. My my car has a flat tire so there's no lift for my daughter and she can't wear a hat because of her hair and of course it doesn't match her coat. Uh but best of luck, Tilly. I hope all go all goes well today. So, let's see if anybody is introducing themselves in the chat. Here we got Let me just see who got Hi, Helen. Oh, you've got Snowy. Is that Is that York or Yorkshire? I can see you now, Chris. And now I'm on this screen. Uh, hi. Hi from London and very wet. Ew. So, we've got lots of rain in Ipsswitch as well. So, so down south we're we're raining. Um, me. Oh, I'm I could spend all day reading the comments. Actually, I just picked I just picked few minutes. Good to Hi, Peter. So, oh, brass monkeys in Shrewsbury. Well, there you go. Uh, hello from Nor Norolk. Oh, electric. What a great idea. Electric blanket. I know someone else who does that and I I think I think I need to need to invest. Hi, Sarah. Oh, that sounds nice. Endorse it. Hi Kirsty. Hi Martin. I'm I'm liking the range. I'm liking the range. We've got cold and we've got snow and we've also got we've also got um we've also got sunny and bright as well and snow contract. That must be very similar to here which is not too bad. Not too bad actually. Right. Um let's let's just move on a little bit. So, um yeah, before before we um I'll move on to talk about the registrations where we're at so far and give you a brief overview of the the program, just wanted to give you a huge thank you for taking the time to submit your abstracts and make this year's hacker the best yet. whether you're a speaker or a poster presenter uh and not forgetting our co-authors and of course the organizations your teams your your very your precious line managers for giving you the time to prepare and present we are very very grateful you're of course the reason why hacker happens so thank you um so what do we have on the program so far m if you could so this is an overview of our program so next slide you might have seen some familiar faces is in in the slide just then that was from our our first hacker which was three years ago in Birmingham. So you'll know that uh the theme for this year's hacker is rising to the challenge. analysis at the heart of health and care systems of the future and we're really placing analysis and of course an analysts um in that very very important place to to support health and care systems and we've we've split uh this year's conference as you know we've we've had these sub themes of shift from hospital to community improving system flow and reducing waste and targeting care investment for better impact and value and of course advancing analysis and uh professional and professional development. So, we've tried to we tried to theme this year's conference as we as we have done before. So, um it's not it's not sort of black and white where where things are are positioned in the program, which you'll see in a minute. Um but we we think it will give us a real sense of uh steer for where we maybe want to focus our attention if we're attending. And and of course, as presenters, you you'll see where you are in the program, which you'll which will be coming up in the next couple of slides. Next slide, please. That's too subtle. No, thank you. I was going to shout then. So, um, this is just an overview of the program. We've got 1,150 registrations to date. So, we'll be coming on to how you can help us improve that in in a minute or two. Over the two days, we've got eight keynotes. Actually, kind of got we kind of got 10, but we got eight eight keynotes. We've got 20 insight sessions. We've got 38 lightning talks, seven workshops, we've got panel discussions, we've got interviews, we've got posters, we've got networking spaces as well. So, we got a really good um I want to say strength and depth. I sound like a a football coach, but we've got a really really good and rich um range of types of presentations. And of course, the the content is varied and range uh um there's a huge range as well. So, ne next slide. Oh, you have to press it twice. That is me. I am so annoying. &gt;&gt; Got it. Sorry about that. &gt;&gt; No, no, no, no, no. That's not That is not you. That is definitely me. I I put some sort of fade fade. There you go. I think I think I've done it another time, but just just be patient with me, obviously. So, there's just the four next slides. Lots of detail here. This is just the overview. I think this is a downloadable version. Well, this is an old version actually. You'll see in a minute that it's not it's not quite up to date. So, this is just this is what we've got. This this is and you if you're on if you're on day one in the morning, you'll spot yourself right there. Um and we've got we've got three. So I I won't go through all the detail here, but this this is this is the the strength and the the just there's so much so many interesting um and such good quality um talks we've got we've got here. I'm really really looking forward to catching up on the ones that I can't see in person. Next slide please. matching. Let's see this is an instantaneous slide or whether it's a so yes we got we got one or two things to be confirmed. This was slightly out of date. So one or two of these have been confirmed as well. Um next slide please. And and and finally the the next slide which is the um the final afternoon. We are very excited about the program. We we we think it's a it's a a really good mix of organizations and the topics that people have chosen to uh provide abstracts on that you're going to be presenting on. So thank thank you again. So next slide please. So these are these are our keynotes. So we uh you may have been introduced to them all already if you've been on to the uh Hubalo site. So if if you haven't been on to the Hubo site yet, then please do. There's there's there's lots of top tips coming your way on how to get the the best out of your experience at Hacker. So that's that's not for me to to go through now because I don't know how I don't know that bit. That's that's my colleagues. But these are these are these are our keynotes. And in in addition to the ones that we have here, which we're really excited about, we've also got Ben Goldacaker who is going to be closing day one. And we've also got uh Andy Olowski who couldn't keep away and is closing the the conference on on day two as well. So we've got a a re a re really strong um array of of speakers as well. So I think that's my final slide. Uh macho is that right? Surprise. Oh no no absolutely not. So this is just a quick overview of the of the workshops. Um, and you can see that we've got actually the first one is now turned into a panel because we decided that other people want to talk about raising the analyst voice and Mark preferred to have a more of a sort of an interactive feel and a discussion about that. And then we've got I won't list all of these because I'm I can see I'm taking up too much time um in Mammuda's agenda and she'll she'll be giving me a stern look. So I'm not I don't look at her. Um so we got some really great workshops actually. Um, some are from the strategy unit and and we've got others from from many other organizations as well. So, I'm really looking forward to some of those. One or two of them I think we're restricting numbers which is uh the second one from uh Lucy Morgan and Sally Thompson. So, that's that's that's sort of um I think we've got 25 to 30 there, but most of the others I think we're going to try and keep them as open as possible so as many people can join as possible. Uh, next slide please. And this is where I I hand over to uh one of my um hacker planning team colleagues and I think it might be match but it also could be Nat match. &gt;&gt; Yes, it's me. Thank you Rachel. &gt;&gt; Over to you. &gt;&gt; Thank you. So I'm going to take you today from uh how to log into the app and how to set up your profile, edit your profile and just give you uh quick to around the platform. So the first of all I'm just going to get out of this slides. So you should all receive the um invite email for the 3rd and fourth December with the unique link to access. So this invite should looks like that and then you should click to join the community. Now um my advice is to copy the link and paste it onto your chrome as it works better. So once you loging in if you log in the first time you will be asked to set up your you will be asked to provide the one-time password which will be provided by the platform. Please check your uh junk inbox just in case if you haven't received your one-time password. Once time you you log into the platform, you'll be able to set up your profile and also edit your profile literally here. So, you can add your pictures, your job title, organization, and answer the other questions and save your profile. Once your profile is set up, you uh you you'll be able to access the all aspects of the platform. So the first one is reception. So this is just a main landing page which gives you the information about the conference uh featured the keynote speaker uh sessions and also featured the speakers which you can connect through here. Another section of the platform is a program. So this is the space where the all sessions are uploaded. So you can swap around the dates like here and you can also filter to the program to the uh specific theme and access workshops on here as well. Once you so you can now when you select your your date you can add the session to your schedule. So you can do that by clicking this button and you can view your selected sessions in the my schedule. So as you can see I've got my session already booked and they all saved here. So the platform will give you notification that your session will start shortly. You can also see the more more info about the session which will be updated uh later this week. Another sections on the platform is the poster booth. So at the moment the poster booths are still in development but once everything is set up the post will looks like that and we've got one test both which we just want to show you the full functionality of the buff. So the main picture you can uh provide us with the YouTube link and we can upload your post description here on the top. So you can have a video played in your above. Uh there will be also your contact details and description of your posters and also downloadable version of your posters. So attendee can download your poster if if you if you consented. Uh another uh aspect of the platform will be workshops but at the moment we still in development of the workshop so we we literally finalizing the pages. So there will be availability to book your workshop or add to your schedule. Another aspect of the platform is as well is the lounge. This is the space for networking. So we will be setting up some networking sessions. You can join the lounge simply by clicking the button and it literally you you join in the lounge as like face toface conference. And the last section of the platform at the top bar is the people section. So this is very unique space where you can connect with the other attendees, you can connect with the speakers or you can connect with our team if you've got any issues. So to do that you can click on the uh speaker or attendee profile, you can direct chat, you can send the note or you you can also set up the meeting with your speaker or attendee to connect. I think that's the all aspects of the platform. So over to you not please excuse me if I've missed anything. Uh yes Muhammad. &gt;&gt; Uh thank you very much. That's really helpful. Uh thank you for this. So my uh question is uh when you are talking about poster you mentioned about YouTube uh could you please you know uh elaborate this way. Do you need to have an YouTube link there as well please? Thank you. &gt;&gt; So that's this is um optional. So if you want to describe your poster, you can re the easiest options to do that is record yourself and describe your post there. Upload your video on YouTube as it unlisted and just provide us with the YouTube link and then we will upload that on the post above. &gt;&gt; All right. Thank you. That's good. Thank you. &gt;&gt; I just wanted to add really quickly. So just to stop any worries on matcha screen you'll see that it's got the full set of the navbar at the top. The people that have logged in you will currently only be able to see the reception the program and I think it's the people. Now the reason for that is because we are just doing some tweaks to the posters because we want to make sure that once they go live everything's in place as it should be. Um and that's the same for the workshops in the lounge. So, please don't worry if you're logging in and only seeing three things and then on mine and matches today you see everything. The only reason for that is because we're still tweaking things and making sure it's as perfect as we we can get it, but all of that will be um open to you uh over the ne over like the next coming coming weeks. It's not something that will be hidden. So, you will see exactly what matching has just shown you here. Um and in regard to posters and also obviously sessions, what we're doing is we are actually connecting you to your session sets. So your talks as presenters or speakers and we're also doing that for posters as well. So that's not something you'd need to worry about. That should already be put in place for you. Um which you could see on on match test one, which we all saw the lovely picture of my face, but again that's how it it pops up. Um so yes sorry match chair I just wanted to just clarify that in case there's any any worry um because they look slightly different. &gt;&gt; Lovely. Thank you Nat and I think over to you. Shall I keep this slide or do you want me to &gt;&gt; um it's to be fair it's it's okay. I'll I'll go straight in. So, um I mean, so the next bit really we're going into that kind of meet and greet and and what I'm going to do now is is kind of show you what that looks like. Um and I'm going to show you the back end of things. So, what we're calling the backstage. Um and I'm going to show you that from a host point of view. Uh just so you can see how much um how much we will be doing. And then I have also um looped in my wonderful assistant for today which will be Mimuda who Mimuda will be playing the the um the space of a speaker. So yourselves so you can really see that those two different spaces. So um here we go. So I will just point out this is just a test set. Uh so this isn't on the actual platform itself. It's what I've built for today to just show you how it would work. So, when the agenda or the program is live, this is how these can pop up. Now, if you're a speaker, um what will happen if you're a speaker assigned to a se a session, you will have in the corner join as speaker um which is really quite a nice little touch that they've set up. So if I go back into the agenda as you've seen with match here as it says on the appro on the program if you are a speaker assigned to a certain talk or presentation it will have a little button that says you can join a speaker and what you do is you click on that and it pulls you through um into the backstage. Now I'm going to be difficult to not go that way purely because I'd like to show you the space as a host. Um, so I am going to go here. I will click in. I just need to I'm just moving this out of the way before I Right. So, what you will then have, and this will be the same for um a speaker, is my camera isn't working, and that's only because I'm on uh Teams and it it my camera can't listen to, but when it comes up, in fact, do it this way, it should uh yes, it'll sort itself out in a minute. So, what this will do is you can test your devices before you go into the backstage element. So it will look at your camera, your microphone, your Oh, I don't know whether you guys can hear that, but it it tests your speaker system so that you can check and it will also check your server connection status um just to make sure that everything is running with the system correctly. And it's just that little bit of um I guess just that little bit of uh less worry I guess when you're coming in that it is working and it's okay. I do know it works. It's just taking a bit of time. Okay. So what I see as a host is I see the entirety of the backstage. And so right now Mimuda excellently has already uh logged in like I showed you um or as a speaker. So I can see Mimuda's little thing here. So as as a host I can pop her on the screen um and I can also add in her slide deck. Now that's a screen share. So what Mimuda is Oh there she is. What Maruda is currently doing, which a lot of you will be doing, um, is sharing your own screen and then as a host, what I will be doing, is I will be adding you into those spaces as and when you you need to be there. But I think it's really important to understand that this backstage bit here is a really good space to make sure that everything is working well and everything is is is kind of succinct. And it's a space that you can I was going to say hang out, but I don't that know whether that's the right word, but that's what I'm going with. Where you can kind of hang out, get a bit of a gist and and maybe have just a couple of minutes to calm before your session. The really good thing about this backstage part um is there is something called a panel chat. Now this panel chat is just between the hosts and the speakers. So when you come into this space and Mimmuda will show show you um your version in a minute. You will be able to talk to me straight away. Um I say me but any of the hacker team straight away. Um and you can ask anything like you know I might say to Mimuda um how is your slides? Do you need any help? And that obviously will be sent to Mimmuda um in in the backstage space where we can start to sort that out. Uh we go. So, as a speaker, um, I would pop Maruda into these spaces and then what as a I would then do is pop her into the stream. When the host says that they're going live, what it does is it does you a countdown of 10 seconds. Is it sec? Yeah, 10 seconds. So this just gives you a couple of sec literally a couple of seconds just to kind of uh get in the zone. I guess what is very good for the host which will help you as presenters is they are able to see alongside this what the attendees see. So, the reason I'm showing you this is because I think sometimes when we're presenting online, it can feel a little bit like as a presenter, you're having to do a lot of the the heavy lifting and a lot of the work yourselves. And that can be really overwhelming when you're trying to auto present. And the reason I'm showing you this end of it is because actually it gives you a really good overview of that will be the job of us. What we will be doing as those hosts or as as a as a host in your space is we will be moving you into the stream, adding in your your shared screen so you can do your presentation and then obviously supporting you through that Q&amp;A and then removing you back into that backstage space. Um all the while checking that in that attendee um environment you're being shown well. Um, and obviously it's it's clear. Um, so that's my end of it and I think it's probably about right to send over to Mimmuda to see so you can see your side if that's okay. I'll stop sharing so then Mimuda can show. There we go. Right. I'm just trying to make sure I'm sharing the right thing. So, can can everybody see this now? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, perfect. So, um, Nat was showing you the host version and as a speaker and this is kind of like what you see. So, it's very similar anyway and you have a lot of the same functionality too. Um, so I can see that I'm a speaker there. Uh, and this is the backstage. But, um, I I can also see that the stream uh, what the attendees can see is just this. So that's my camera and also the screen that I'm sharing. And I could also see what is going on backstage and that's Nat who's backstage and she can't be seen by the attendees. It gives you this really cool when you log in it gives you this little uh take a tour button. So it can show you which what the different functions are as it's doing. So here one of the things that we can do is that um if we do have any issues or you have any issues accessing uh the chat what we'll do is um we'll copy uh an invite guest uh link and we'll send that to you directly. So there's always a backup plan to the backup plans. So the backup plan to the backup plan is if you have any problems joining um just drop us a message one of the hacker team or or drop us an email and what we'll do is we'll send you a direct link to this specific session um and then once you click it you'll be pulled straight directly into this and then you just join and you'll join automatically into the backstage. Um, and then the host chair or room lead will pop you onto the stream when it's ready for you to do your talking or your bit. Uh, and it's very similar on this side as well. I can see all the various bits that N can also see. You'll be able to see the attendee chat, uh, the panel chat, Q&amp;A, um, when people are asking questions. Um, you can add different bits of content here if you want to. So these are just advanced functions but uh we expect that we'll mainly be using the attendee chat Q&amp;A uh and the panel chat is uh is your point of call for any any of your needs if there's anything going disastrous disastrously wrong which hopefully won't be uh but also if you need uh to ask any questions um once you're getting ready for your session or just after. So I think that's it. &gt;&gt; Yep. I I think the only really big thing that is different on the host side and again I think this will be a conversation that would be had um beforehand is there is an ability um if somebody raises their hand to have them added onto the screen alongside you. So this isn't something that is uh that we that we are currently using um but it is is an option um and that's for that Q&amp;A space but predominantly and more routinely the Q&amp;A space would be would kind of be managed through this here um and again your host will will help you with that because I think um it can be quite hard can't it when you're trying to you're trying to present Um and then what and then you've got quite a few questions coming in and that kind of needs to be just just filtered and managed a little bit I think. Um so all of that is managed back end and then once you finished your so if for example Mimuda has done as always a wonderful chat um it's now the end of her chat uh she's had excellent questions. She's absolutely blown the socks off everybody but it's now time that she would like to go backstage and have a cup of tea. it is the host um job to remove you and that is a simple removal of both Mimmuda and her screen and you just go back into that backstage space with me or maybe not me but with your host where um you know chats a conversation can be had or it might just be that you'd like to leave the session um and and carry on your day watching um other other excellent talks. So it is quite simple um but but simple in a good way I think is is really the the thing we're going for here. Um now the other part that we talk about quite a bit is let me see here we go is the workshop spaces. So again here you would be set up if you're doing a workshop you would be set up as a host or a moderator um as I am here. Uh and again now I've got my face on it. Marvelous. Uh, and again what it will do is when you open that up, as you can see, it goes out and tests um your camera and your um and your kind of equipment. It you can do the test down here or if you've already done it beforehand, you can just obviously join via this. Now, as a um as that host or as that moderator, what is really good is you have the ability to present and share your screen. Um and in that present space, let me find something to um I'll present you all back for a little bit. Uh you can have either yourself here. So if I apologize, you can probably all see me in this tiny little um so you can have yourself here and and and be showing as so or if you wanted to, you can turn yourself so you're off screen um and you're just showing uh your your screen. Uh and what that does or what that will allow you to do is have that that flexibility and that functionality in those in those workshop spaces. Um the other thing that is really quite nice in here as well is because is you have like your countdown which some people love and some people hate but it is quite nice for timekeeping. Um because I think when it comes to workshops we all rabbit hole. I think it's quite a common thing for us to do. Um, but this just allows you to to know quite quickly how how much time is left in this space. Um, and and uh you know if we need to if you needed to move things along again as um a uh as a host you also have a live chat space for this room. Um and again you have the same bit bits that a speaker has and with the Q&amp;A from your space as a host you can moderate this if you wanted to. So you can look at the Q&amp;As that are coming in and accept or reject um as as and where you feel that that is that is appropriate. And you can also if you would like to um have a bit of a a sneaky sneaky sneak about who is in the room with you. And what's really nice is when you do have friends, which I do not, um they do come up here and what you can do is move them. Um so if you would like them on the screen, you can move them from spectator into that space of participant. Um and that is something that you're able to do. Um and again if someone raises a hand because they want to ask a question in that more workshopppy environment you can again pop them onto the screen. Um there is a limit to how many people can be on a screen at once. Um and to my knowledge I think that is 12. Um but I can double check that. Uh however, I think maybe um 12 people all on the screen all talking at the same time be quite intense and probably not something that a workshop would really be looking for. But again, um that is absolutely down to you and and what you would like to do um with this space. So that is uh a quite uh quick tour um of a workshop. Um I'm just you just trying to check yes 12 participants at one time and that includes a screen share. So again, you can have quite a busy busy front if you'd like to. Um, seems quite intense to me, but that's just because again, as you can see, I have no friends. So, and I but for others that are a bit more sociable um and want that like that kind of more rich engagement at the front, that that is a really good thing that we can that this this space can facilitate. So, I think the last part, um, I was going to just, and Matt Jay touched on it before, but I was just going to come to the posters. Um, and the reason I was going to do that is because there were a couple of really quite lovely things that are set in these virtual booths. um which I think do or can be yeah just a really lovely little thing to to highlight. So anybody that is doing a poster um you will have the ability as Mache had said before to add in a um video on the top banner. These videos would need to these the word video. Yeah, these videos would need to be um added via YouTube um because that is the way that they are linked in. You can have those videos unlisted. So it might be better. We have our own hacker YouTube channel. The way that it was done last year when videos were done is that they were under an unlisted um link. So they weren't shown on the YouTube channel itself and they were just connected that way. So if people are worrying about that, I am more than happy um to have like a bigger conversation around that that there especially if you're thinking of of of adding one in and we can we can facilitate that. Sorry. We can facilitate that um for you. Apologies. Um the other really good things about these virtual booths is um as a attendee if you are interested in talking to a poster presenter about their poster there are two little buttons here that are really great. So the first which is called I'm interested. What this actually does um is it sends your contact information to that to that virtual booth person going I'm interested in your poster. Um here are my contact here's my contact information. And what that will allow that po that um poster presenter to do is obviously contact that attendee back. And it might be that they set up their own little one-to-one session to talk about that that uh poster further or they might say, "Oh, should we pop into a lounge and have a bit of a chitchat?" But it it gives that level of engagement that that is seen a lot in that more um physical space that sometimes is a little bit lost in the virtual. So that's a really nice part that we can do. I mean, I can press it, but because I am the poster person, it will just come back to me. Um, and the other part which is quite nice is you can just open a personal chat between yourself and that poster presenter. Um, so that you can ask questions. Um, I I I mean I can't really open it with myself. Um, I mean I can try but it doesn't work very well. Um, but what this does is it opens that personal chat up. And in that personal chat, as you can see, it tells again what the posters title is, but it also tells you their organization um and where they're um and obviously where they're based. So, United Kingdom, Scotland, etc. So, it has a little bit of information that to start off with that presenter, which is really quite cool. Um as you match shown already your abstract for your poster will sit here. Um there is an image space here for a slightly smaller image. Um and then you have an ability as M said before. So this is currently um so if I download it, it opens up like here and you can save it. However, for anybody that isn't wanting it to be downloadable, there is another option here which opens it again. That is only a only there because I'm logged in. But for anybody else, it would sit and look like she says when she finds it, anybody anybody that's not logged in, it would look like this. So you have not got the ability to download um for anybody that that does not want their stuff um being downloadable. Um and again the links here for this part would only be open and and and seen for the period of time of the conference because then they would be they would be shut down. Um and I think that is me but please jump in team if I have forgotten something. Um because my lack of tea this morning is is clearly um mushing my brain cells. Plenty of questions uh in the chat as well. So you might want to jump in there with the questions that are coming up again. um they might be following them and hopefully we'll answer lots of them uh through the remainder of the session. Anyway, um so I've just got a few slides to talk through on um some of the guidance we're offering for presenters and for posters. Um and the presenters are for all types of talks and workshops. Um and so we're expecting that the majority of the format is going to be slides. So usual PowerPoint slides. Uh people or might also choose not to use very many slides and just have themselves speaking um to the camera uh which is obviously absolutely fine. So just um uh if you're doing that then it's probably best to share screen yourself and then take slides down when you wish or just not have them at all uh if that's your preference and your presentation style in terms of content structure. And these are just best best practice tips as opposed to kind of hard and fast rules that we're saying you sort of operate by or or kind of produce your presentation with. Uh but having a really clear introduction about what the problem was or the question was that you were you were looking to address um and what you'll be covering in your presentation is really important. Uh and I know this is a lots of this will be common sense. Um, so forgive me if I'm if I'm just saying really basic stuff that you feel that you already know. Uh, so having a logical flow is really important. Uh, organizing your content in a way that kind of tells a story or kind of takes people through uh, a particular um, process is really important to help the audience sort of follow along as well. Particularly for lightning sessions, I would say as they they are shorter. So making sure that you get your point across is really important and that logic really helps with that. Um, and remember to sort of finish on a strong conclusion, leaving uh a summary and the the thing that you want people to really take away from your presentation. Um, make sure you you kind of share that as a statement at the end of your presentation. That's always really um helped those of us who kind of struggle to to sort of follow along and just generally um make sure you they they kind of take that the message away. Um and then really importantly provide your links, your contact details. If you're interested in people contacting you about your work or following up with you if they've got any questions, um then do take that opportunity to provide your contact details. Obviously, you can sign them assign post to people to your profile or ask them to directly message you or set up a meeting with you. Uh you can also do all those things. Uh and that's the beauty of having an online platform this year. Uh and then when we come to the slide design, um all this is really hopefully stuff that you've already covered if you've uh done your presentation and we've seen lots of them already and and they certainly have. Um simplicity is really important. The general view is to have like one idea per slide. Um particularly with online content, uh you're doing a lot of the talking. So we want people to be uh listening and um the slides should sort of relate to what you're talking about. Uh that really helps with engagement um and just for our brains to sort of follow along as well. Um readability is really important. So we know that people will be joining using a variety of devices. Um so bear that in mind when you're putting together any slides when you come to the the font sizes. There's some there's some sort of some guidance there. Um but equally with visual aids that you're using whether that's graphs, charts, images, infographics, uh icons, whatever it is, uh just make sure that they they're easily readable as well. Um consistency is really important. So uh just having that same design throughout uh throughout is um great. And also our branding. If you can add the hacker logo, then that's great. So people uh if for the recording uh recordings maybe upload them on YouTube it's really evident uh where you sort of presented um and if you can add our hashtag and then people can sort of uh talk about your bits of work um on LinkedIn and other uh social media spaces. Um can I have the next slide please match? Um and these are uh just some really uh basic tips for presenting as well. Um online it's really important with clear speech. One of the things that inevitably will happen at some point in the conference someone's mic will drop or the or it'll some the signal will drop out or unreliable Wi-Fi. Whatever it is, try and be clear as possible. And if you recognize that you're sort of dipping low or cutting out, then just share that with the audience that you're having some technical issues or if they can hear you, ask them to add that to the chat box. Um, and your uh chair is there to support uh with flagging that if that is an issue for the audience as well. And then we can work around and chairs will be primed to step in if there's any major issues. Anyway, um and uh the main thing is to make sure that you're introducing yourself if the chair misses anything crucial about your presentation, but I'm sure they're all uh very apt in being able to presentation. Um confidence is really key in your delivery. Uh facing the screen and talking to your mic is really important so that you come across clear. um practice and pacing yourself particularly for lightning talks uh is really important. Uh on this online conference unlike our face toface there's very little wiggle room for start and stop times. Um and so we will be moving quite quickly between sessions and between talks. So even within a stream there could be up to four talks within that segment uh that we might need to work through quickly. So um pace yourself. So it shouldn't feel fast when you're doing it. Uh so the best thing to you could do is rehearse and um avoid rushing through things. So if you feel like you're rushing through then you might want to simplify your presentation and the key things that you're covering. Um and it's important to sort of keep an eye on the clock. Uh chairs will come in. Um I think Rachel went through the timings earlier anyway, so I won't repeat them. So keep an eye on your clock, but if you if for any reason um you start your Q&amp;A earlier, that's fine. If you start it later, that's fine. It's just going to be either reduced or expanded. Um, but the end time will be quite strict. Um, and the other final thing is to always have a backup plan. Um, whether that's having your presentation on your desktop in case something happens on your computer or you want to send it to us or save it on an email or something like email it to yourself or something like that. It's always good practice to have a backup of your slides somewhere. Um and in terms of engagement tips, one big key point for online engagement is to ask and encourage uh the audience to ask questions as well. So uh whether that's uh if you're comfortable with it, asking them to raise their hand uh if they've got questions either during or after um during the sort of allocated Q&amp;A slot um and encourage them to ask in the chat and um decide with your chair in advance how you want to run that. So you might want to respond to some questions in the chat yourself. You might want to take raised hands yourself. You might want the chair to facilitate that and that's what they are there to do. Um by default we're assuming that the chairs will facilitate the Q&amp;A segments. But if you have any other preferences, just let them know when you arrive earlier for your session. Um and you can um jot down any last minute changes on the panel chat to them. Uh it's really important for recordings but also for inclusiveness of like the wider audience uh to repeat questions uh the questions that you're answering. Uh so if someone's speaking to the mic that's fine but if you're picking something up on chat you might want to repeat it um so that the audience um can also listen to what the question was. Uh and if you're unsure about anything always admit uncertainty. There's always options to follow up. This is a great community. Everybody's really open. uh people are here to share their work and learn from one another. Uh so it's uh you know we welcome people admitting if they if you're not sort of certain about an answer to something and keeping those connections going to follow up with people if there's um bits that you want to share with them after and we're obviously always here to help. Um now I'm going to move on to um some poster guidance. So m if I could have the next slide. Um again, we've provided some of this already in an email in advance and we'll provide all this guidance following this session as well along with the recording. Uh but just by format um we've already provided some guidance on that. So you might do it on PowerPoint or you might be sending us a PDF and both are fine. We'll put them up on the virtual booths that Mache and Nat uh showed you earlier. Um and you can absolutely provide an explainer video if you want to. Uh and it comes up in the banner. So, it's really great cuz it starts playing when people are sort of looking through the rest of your content in your booth. Uh, general tips, again, similar to that of presentations, think about readability. Uh, people are obviously viewing it on a screen mostly. If you're making it downloadable and you're okay with sharing your poster and people being able to access it, that's great. They can sort of um view that at their own leisure on whichever device they're on later on, too. Um, think about the layouts, having clear headings, shorter paragraphs, making good use of the space that you've got, including keeping in white space. Um, again, similar to presentations, having that consistency and clarity of like what you're saying, um, and the design of it. Um, accessibility is also important. uh avoiding textheavy images is quite important uh for this uh for this one especially for um uh PDF versions as well. Uh and just uh some tips that lots of us forget about proofreading and and getting feedback on your posters. Um and then finally on posters and all of uh this is stuff uh on the next slide which Nat has already mentioned hopefully where you can find posters on the Hubilo platform. Um uh match can I have the next slide? And just a few key tips uh about um how people can engage with you on your poster booth. Uh if they select I'm interested then they can set up a meeting with you. Um, one thing to note is if you are open to people meeting with you during the duration of the conference, either those two days, uh, just make it clear when you might have slots available. And what happens is when you set up a meeting, it gets sent to your calendar and then you can, um, add it to your Outlook calendar, whatever calendar you've um, joined with, and you'll be able to meet them, and you can go into a separate room as Nat was describing there. And then the chat button is there so they could directly message you. Um and a video as we've already explained. Right. I'm going to I've only got a couple of more slides so hopefully it won't take too much longer. Um really important points that we've all been saying hopefully. But just to emphasize them because they are I guess the critical points of this. Um it's really important to test your access to the platform in advance and at least a day before. um it gets really hard to sort of and panic mode and chaotic trying to do it just before a session or even during a session. So if you can make sure that you've got access to hub below beforehand that's great. Join at least 10 minutes early. Check your mic, check your camera, check you can share screen, check all that in the backstage space. Uh and then you can uh access the panel chat as well there. Um the preference is to use Chrome and close any unused apps. it can slow down when you're delivering if there's lots of people on um and you've got lots of apps open as well. So, if you've got lots going on in your browsers um it can slow down uh or delay how you come across when you're uh you're sharing your screen. Um and if you want to, you can upload your slides and posters in advance. So, if you want to share uh share your screen directly from the platform, then there's a way of doing that. But you need to upload your slides earlier. It's good to also have a backup plan as I've previously mentioned and if there are any issues during the session, the chairperson will intervene. If there's any problems with the chair having that the chair has with any u Wi-Fi or dropping out or any other technical issues, uh then we're all on standby and briefed to jump in if we need to. Um so that's our backup plan to our backup plan. Um and so you can contact us as well at any point. So if you've got any issues during the session, you can message directly message one of us during the session or um you can send us an email as well. Um messaging is probably quicker. Uh and then my final one I think is on uh promoting your session. Uh so we definitely want to help amplify your contribution to the conference. Um so you can share your session details on social media. um use our hashtag and tag us on LinkedIn is our main platform for uh engaging with our audience on this uh and we can provide you some promotional wording and graphics which we'll be sending with your guidance materials after this session. Um and we just encourage you to directly ask colleagues and members of your network and people you know and people you work with uh to attend. Come along for your session, come along for other sessions. That's one of the beauties of having online conferences that people can dip in and out. Um as uh and be flexible around their schedules at work also all of it available in playback later. So it'll is still accessible for people uh who can't make um a session that they want to or if there's multiple sessions parallel running uh that you want to attend. Uh, and during the conference, we encourage people to engage with the audience and attendees either through Q&amp;A or during the break times in the networking lounges. Go in there, set up a chat, you know, label one of the lounges, a topic that you're interested in. Uh, and invite people by adding it to the event feed and just saying, "I'm interested in talking to people about X. Does anybody want to jump into a lounge?" Um, and if we don't start it, then uh it doesn't happen. And and once we do, there's often a buzz around it. So I encourage everybody to to do that especially if you want feedback on your sessions or something that you're interested in. Um invite people along to to join you in a lounge and again share your contact details and send personal invitations about the session. Uh and after the conference, um we encourage you to sort of share your experience of what it's been like to be part of the conference, key takeaways, um and share links to the conference content um that we share post the conference. Uh and one other important thing to note here is um as we all know the NHS and wider health and care sector uh has very little resource for this sort of thing. And so we've worked really hard to bring it back to you and unfortunately we haven't been able to do it face to face. Um but we've got a lot of skin in the game and really want to put this on for the community cuz we really see the value in creating a space like this. So all that you share during and after the conference really help us make the case for putting this on time and time again. Um and I'm going to be completely open. This is really hard for us to make a case for sometimes and I can only see it getting harder. Um, so we're going to really rely on your step stories and your experience um to really strengthen our case for it uh for any hopefully preceding years and and for us to be able to do it again. Um so yeah, finally over to Mache now. Now I know you've only got a couple of minutes so &gt;&gt; so as we said please contact the strategy unit uh at tnc nhs.net If you have any question or if you need any further support during the day or before the conference as you can see uh this is our hack team. So Natasha, Rachel, Mammuda and myself will be able to support you through during the conference and before that the next steps we will send you the recording and presenter support supporter packs. you will share the coms box and the deadline for presentation and poster will be 24th November and I think that's the last slide. Yes, that's the last slide. And Rachel please. &gt;&gt; No, I was just I was just going to say that there's been quite a few questions in the chat which is great. Um and we'll be if haven't haven't I've been trying to answer them but if we haven't managed to get through them all then we'll do those afterwards. Some of them I've tried to group in some of the responses like co-presenters is a common one. So, we'll be adding all co-presenters to your sessions if they're not there already. If you've shared that information with us, sometimes we we couldn't always tell the difference between a co-presenter and a co-author, but we want all to be acknowledged and we certainly want your presenters to be on the session with you. So, thanks. I'll just say we'll we'll we'll cover off all your questions. Um, and we'll try and incorporate the responses into the support pack uh afterwards as well. Thanks for coming everybody. Hope you got something out of the session. Really grateful for your contributions and I think we've we've hit we've hit a level. Oh, we've got faces. I love seeing faces. Hello, Janette. Oh, so lovely to see you all. Um, brilliant. So, shall we should we should we close close us down? Uh, and uh we'll see everybody again in a couple of weeks. &gt;&gt; Thank you all. Thank you. Bye. &gt;&gt; Bye. Bye. Bye.