Right. Hello everyone and welcome to this session of the Health and Care Analytics Conference 2025. Uh my name is David Callahan from the strategy unit and I'm going to be your chair for this session where we've got a series of excellent presentations around improving flow. Uh we want to get straight into it, make best use of the time, but a few quick housekeeping points. I'm sure you're familiar with these by now. Uh, please use the Q&amp;A box to submit questions at any time. You can upvote questions you're most interested in and I'll I'll pick those up first for the speaker. The chat is open for reflections and discussion. Uh, you can view speaker bios and connect with speakers in the people tab and you can take notes directly within the platform as well. So that's the admin done. So without further ado, we will begin now with the first presentation that's going to be delivered by Marcus Yarwood who is senior quantitive insights manager from Imperial College Health Partners and he's going to be delivering a talk around understanding NHS waiting lists insights from theorked data lab in Northwest London. So over to you Marcus. &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks so much. Um yeah, thanks uh thanks for the intro. Um, yeah, as as David just said, I'm I'm Marcus and I work for Imperial College Health Partners, ICP, which is the Health Innovation Network for Northwest London. Um, and I'm presenting today on um a project that was uh done in collaboration with the health foundation called the network data lab. And this was the topic that we did um the most recent topic that we did was uh on waiting lists. Um you might um I've alo also noticed there is another network data lab presentation happening later this afternoon. That's a presentation by the health foundation. So I'd definitely urge you to kind of go along to that one as well to see to see their view on things. Uh if I try and move my slides across there we go. So what is the network data lab? So um as I say it's a collaboration with with the health foundation. Um and it's uh brings together analytical teams across the country. So we are one of uh five labs across the country. Um and there were four four of those labs worked on this this topic of uh of understanding waiting lists and the ultimate aim is to um kind of have a deeper understanding of the factors affecting people's health. Um and you know a topic a different topic is kind of picked each year. Um so the the the kind of insights from this are then shared both locally and nationally. um and they they kind of then provide evidence for kind of some uh policy areas or um improvement areas. So uh yeah, as I say, the health foundation has commissioned this program. Um and the Northwest London lab is made up of uh Imperial College Health Partners, which I represent, as well as Imperial College London and the ICS in Northwest London. A big part of this analysis is um a uh collaboration with a kind of patient and career advisory group. So PPIE patient public involvement and engagement is really really strong in this in this project and at every stage um we try to engage uh patient and public partners as much as possible. So that includes the kind of scoping element of of every each each topic. Um so you know the patients will and public will have involvement in what research questions we want we um we investigate. They're able have opportunity to kind of um express their views on where the analysis should go. Um we then present kind of uh you know decisions on research questions share kind of highlights from any statistical analysis plan. um and then kind of share interim results um to kind of get their their kind of insight insights and views on some of the results that kind of feed into the final report. So here's a kind of example of the of the kind of uh the flyer that was that was um that was shared in recruitment of of people on on that advisory group. The data set that we use for this analysis is called the discover data set. Um and that's kind of uh a kind of requisite for for the the being one of these labs is having uh this kind of linked data set um that were able to link across healthcare settings. So the discover data set um contains patients who are registered to a GP practice in Northwest London. So that's currently around 2.9 million patients, but it also includes patients who have been previously registered. So that's an additional two million patients who who we have their historical risk uh data for. So as I say it's linked across multiple health settings. So um that's across primary care. So primary care uh observations, prescriptions and appointments as well as secondary care in the form of SUS. So uh accident emergency inpatient and outpatients um as well as some community mental health social care data as well as of course waiting list information as well as some kind of bespoke data sets in there as well. Access to this is managed by a data access committee who meet every month and they assess every project based on its um uh benefits to public. So you've got to demonstrate some some benefits to public benefits in order to to have access to this data. Um and yeah as it's a it's a deidentified data set. So there is a identifiable kind of clinicianf facing version of this data set but for the for kind of research purposes and kind of also service evaluations there is a deidentified version which we kind which we access for this. Um and um because it's deidentified, there's no kind of patient identifiable data in there, but it does mean that there is a patient key for which we're able to link across all of these health uh health settings. So be able to see um a patient's journey across like primary care, secondary care, and across community mental health etc. So really, really, really powerful. Um onto research objectives for this analysis in particular. So um objective one was uh around describing weight lengths for patients waiting for elective care. Two was around describing the reasons they're removed from the waiting list and then objective three looking at the uh primary and secondary care healthcare usage before and after waiting. And then objective four was more of a causal uh question assessing the impact of waiting for longer periods of time on healthcare usage and costs. So these were um uh dived in collaboration with the health foundation AC. So all uh all labs across the country looked at these same race research questions. So onto some of the results. So um here we've got a kind of uh proportion of uh uh patients waiting less than 18 weeks and within other kind of categories of waiting time by age group. Um now here we see that um 73% of people aged 85 plus weight waited less than 18 weeks whereas 63% of people aged at 18 to 24 waited less than 18 weeks. So some kind of age disparity there um where younger people generally seem to be waiting longer and lower proportions of of them within the kind of 18 weeks um band. However, when we looked at a lot of other demographics, um we were we were kind of struggling to find differences uh between these proportions. So, for example, when this is looking at deprivation quintile, we struggle to find any kind of major differences on waiting times. Um and this was kind of consistent across a lot of other kind of demographic variables. Looking at the kind of frequency of of waiting list, we can see a kind of heavily tailed distribution here. So, uh, big proportions of people within that kind of shorter waiting time, but then it kind of the the the tale kind of carries on a long time. So, you've got some patients there who are waiting multiple years um within that within that for for their treatment. Um, so this means that when we're kind of looking at uh the standard deviation and mean, it would be much more sensitive to outliers. Um, therefore, median might be a more appropriate look at to be looked at. So, that's what we did. We looked at medium weight times and they did gave a slightly different perspective than looking at just like the proportions of patients uh proportions of pathways within 18 weeks which is kind of the traditional way of looking at things. So um we found a difference between genders. So a slightly long men's waiting slightly longer than women on uh on the medium weight time. And then on by ethnicity, um some slight differences there where white patients generally wait have a shorter medium weight time than other ethnicities. And then age band as we saw in the kind of other chart, we kind of see big differences there between the younger age groups and the older age groups where older age groups generally um of their median weight time is much is much shorter. And then for those other demograph demographic variables where we kind of struggle to see differences in proportion waiting in 18 weeks we do start to see some differences here. So those most deprived although the differences may be smaller than you might expect there is some differences there where the most deprived are waiting slightly longer on on average for the median. And we also looked at frailty here. So some slight differences there where maybe those more severe frailty patients are kind of being prioritized. It's worth noting that when we show this to the patient advisory group, they kind of express a little bit concern at these at these results and and the fact that that that might not kind of reflect some of their lived experience um that they were kind of uh maybe surprised as the kind of lack of differences that we that we were seeing here. The biggest difference we did see was across specialties. So, um neurosurgery, neurology at the top there in terms of the highest weight length in on on average. And then down at the bottom, you've got some of the kind of I guess uh things like elderly medicine, uh mental health, things like that. So, that was the biggest biggest difference we we we saw was between those specialties, which might, you know, have an impact on some of the uh differentials in in in demographics as well. Um this is one kind of outlining some of the gaps in data quality that we had. So um when we looked at kind of reasons for removal there were big gaps in data quality. So uh you know for over 40% of um of pathways we weren't able to find uh the reason for clock stop. Um which means it's very difficult to to f to analyze that further. Right. um you know when you when you've got a high level of missingness there's not really much you can you can do with that analysis. Looking at healthcare usage there were slightly um uh maybe slightly surprising results here in that for most healthcare settings we were seeing a higher rate of usage prior to their referral compared to whilst they waiting and after treatment. Um and that would except for the except for the elective admissions that is um and it's most noticeable for those A&amp;E attendances where they kind of got quite high rates of of uh of activity prior to referral. When we looked at costs, obviously that that kind of um tracks very similarly. So you can kind of see very similar trends for any attendances, emergency admissions um and GPU appointments for but for the elective admissions slightly different. we're seeing a kind of higher cost of elective emissions whilst they were waiting and a decrease in cost after treatment as well. So just in the last kind of minute or so I'm just going to kind of just so our last objective was looking at um the kind of um the causal element of um of longer weights um and this was our method. So we were looking at um a staggered diff difference in difference analysis. Now this is a kind of example of what we were expecting to see. Um and we were expecting to see a kind of um a kind of steady rise in activity like whilst people were waiting um and for those longer waiters we were kind of expecting a a kind of higher uh rate of health care usage during their waiting period um and immediately after their wage period and then as and then once they're treated a kind of steady decline in healthcare usage. You know, as we've seen in the previous slides, that wasn't really the case, which meant that um do uh um you know, doing this this cause anal analysis was was quite tricky because those assump ass assumptions that we were making on the methodology um weren't met. So some interesting findings and we we still went ahead with this difference and difference um and kind of again struggled with some of the data quality elements uh which meant that we were having a high levels of exclusions um which meant that significance wasn't met on a lot of on a lot of our findings which was unfortunate um but I guess a finding in itself in terms of advocating for uh better quality of data in order to be able to do this kind of analysis. So one final slide on implications and impact and realize I'm slightly going over uh but I'll just go go through quickly. So as I say some groups waited longer but disparities varied mostly by specialty and those kind of demographic variances weren't quite as high as as as maybe expected according to the patient advisory group. Um again healthcare usage patterns weren't as expected um which limited our cause analysis. As I mentioned kind of there were significant data gaps and difficulty linking the waiting list data to secondary care in order to get that kind of uh that link to to kind of healthcare usage and um to the actual procedure that was carried out um which made it difficult to to uh get to those conclusions. Insights from the patient envir advisory group um were were really really valuable. um they uh kind of talked about their impact on phys physical, mental and economic well-being where lots of people turning to private care and um they also identify gaps in support and communication. So um lots of uh lots of need for um communication whilst people are waiting to like inform like you know how where they are on the waiting list you know uh en sure they haven't been forgotten about essentially uh and promoting that kind of waiting well element. So um thank you all for listening. Um, hopefully there's maybe a time for at least one question, but I realize I might have gone slightly over my time limit, but thank you so much. &gt;&gt; Sorry, that's quite all right. Marcus, can you hear me? Okay. Um, we've just got a couple of minutes. Um, someone asked about um whether the differences you saw were statistically significant. Can you say anything about that? Yeah. So, you know, most of those um uh descriptive elements we were we were purely purely descriptive. So, so the answer is no on on on a lot of those. The kind of cause analysis we did find some a statistical significance in terms of the GP appointments, but it was kind of in the opposite direction to to how we'd expect. So it's kind of then quite difficult to interpret in the fact that um we found an increase in um in GP appointments uh following treatment. So um you know that maybe maybe the kind of hypothesis that we had maybe needs needs to be altered and then the methods altered in order to to kind of get that cause analysis is correct. But um yeah definitely some some learnings in terms of how we derive that methodology. &gt;&gt; Okay. Um, and just one last thing, I mean, were any of the results, you know, more unexpected than others? Were there any real surprises in the results? Um, and could you share share your thoughts on those? &gt;&gt; Yeah, as I say, um, there were lots of kind of, um, you know, when we presented these to the patient advisory group, like, you know, I think as a kind of key key learning from this from this from this, uh, study was the was the engagement with with the patient and public in terms of interpreting results. um a lot of them kind of expressed surprise at the the lack of um difference in waiting times between some of the demographic groups that we're looking at. You know, that a lot of their lived experience was that maybe the the older uh age groups were kind of being left behind or being forgotten about. Um or there were kind of huge disparities between, you know, so economic groups um which, you know, we found, I guess, some evidence of, but there were very very small differences. Um and obviously you know the kind of patterns in healthcare usage which we uh had made assumptions about in terms of our causal analysis meant that uh were were surprising in the in the fact that it me it meant that the the uh the methods weren't were no longer viable. So yeah maybe there's something about a kind of stage approach in terms of uh you know assessing the methodology for a causal approach based on some of the descriptive results which is something to take on board. Brilliant. Okay. Um we're just having um a slight difficulty with the next speaker. So which means that we've got time for one more question mark if that's all right with you. So um &gt;&gt; you perfect. &gt;&gt; The final one was um yeah what program did you use to analyze the data? Uh was it R or something else? &gt;&gt; Yeah, as a combination so all of our um data is held within Snowflake databases. So it's um uh so it's a combination of SQL to extract the data um and then we used um R for for a lot of the uh for a lot of the analysis. So a lot of those data visualizations as well as the you know putting together the causal elements um uh there is um uh we have you know put all of our kind of code on on GitHub as well. So I'm happy to happy to kind of share that um uh as well. Good. Well, thank you so much for brilliant talk. Um, Marcus, that's that's all we've got time for now. So, I'll let you go and we'll we'll bring in the next speaker. Thank you very much, Marcus. Great.