So the next session that we've got, if you're staying around on the main stage, is um a panel interview session. How we got here, analysts stories of rising to the challenge. Our interviewer today is James Sandy, who will be drawing out reflections, lessons, and personal journeys from our panel. Over to you, James. interesting uh session before. So uh we'll do our best to follow that. Uh we've got um three analysts with us from really varied and interesting background. Really pleased to welcome to this session. Um we're going to keep it to time because I get into trouble if I don't. Um I am going to ask each of them uh so Tom, Brian, and Siobhan uh to talk about their backgrounds, their current roles, their story so far and uh their kind of current career path. I'm going to give them 10 minutes and I'm going to be ruthless. I'm going to jump in after that time and uh once uh we've sort of had an overview from each of them, we're going to have some time for some questions and then some reflections on kind of future role of analysts. So things that we've touched on in some of the speeches and talks today. So um first of all I'm going to come to uh Siobhan who uh Siobhan Licorice is a data architect the NHS business services authority is also a branch lead for a northeast and north Cumbria and uh Siobhan you're going to tell us um a bit of your life story or as much of it as you can manage um in the space of 10 minutes. So uh I'll pass to you first and then uh we'll come to Rian after you. So, uh, Siobhan, please. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh, [clears throat] can everybody hear me? &gt;&gt; We can hear you loud and clear. Yes, thank you. &gt;&gt; Um, cool. So, an update to that. Um, current role is head of data visualization at Kent and Medway ICB. Um, data architecture was previous um, story so far, how I got here. Um, um, Grenadian um, moved here. It was a very tiny island in the Caribbean. Um to give you some perspective, uh it's 100,000. Um that's the the total populace. Um moved here July 2017. Um after having quite a decent enough career um in uh graphic design and the creative industry um and government and the educational sector as a monitoring and evaluation officer. Um I am information systems trained. Um so moved um then moved to the UK 2017, got into the NHS um November 2017. Um so give or take 8 years now. Um and fell in love with it. Uh just to be clear, I'm based in the Northeast. Um moved to the Northeast from Grenada. Uh go figure. Absolutely love it. Um, and you'd have to try really really hard, an impossible task to get me out of the naughties. Um, so moving it getting into the NHS. Um, so it's quite an interesting um, story I think for me. Um, because the role I actually went that that I interviewed for, um, I like talking about this because it it feels unconventional. Um, but I think I like to say I like I like highlighting that a lot of times people think when rising to the challenge it's only about you as an analyst or trying to get into the role, but I think it's really about opportunities as well and you have to shout out really good managers and people who are in those positions that create the opportunities um and I was um given on multiple occasions um that bit. So when I first interviewed to get into the NHS, I interviewed for a band five uh manager role um for MIT NHR shed services at the NHS business services authority. Um didn't get that um but I think through that having a conversation from the interviews um the managers saw something in me um which I'm always grateful for. So got into got offered a ban for position as an MI analyst. Um and from there just sort of got in um did my thing. Um obviously I came in with a lot of experience um and I think it was sort of bittersweet um because in my previous role in Grenada I was involved with um you know the national vocational um qualification um you know it's it's TV it's based on city and gale. Um so I thought right okay having these many uh years of experience it would be quite easy for me to get into a role in the UK. Um and that was very much not the case. Um so I had to pretty much restart my career um obviously had to put it on steroids a little bit um to get back to position. Um but yeah so it I found it quite challenging um that there wasn't like that transference of and recognition of of skills and experience. Um but anyway, still I didn't lose it. Um put that to use. Um went into the band four role. Um saw the saw and felt the ceiling um of that team. Um great team. Um but it was just at the ceiling of band five essentially which was the manager's role. Um so there was no progression. Um so did what we needed to do. Um performance um did the evidence um you know so the execs and others would see and managers would see right. Okay. Um, you know, we whatever we're putting forward as a proposal, as analysts, we always have to justify the justification of the justification. Um, bit of a mouthful there. So, so in doing that, um, I was able to progress into band five as a senior MI analyst. Um, which was good for a while, but, um, at the rate that I buzz, um, sometimes worryingly. So, I thought, right, okay, well, what's next? Um and I like highlighting this bit as well uh because I actually went for a band seven role um at North Umbrea Healthcare. Um and again I had a very similar situation where managers and interviewers um you know took that chance on me and saw it saw saw the potential. Um and when I went for that band seven role um I need to make a point about this um and I had a conversation with managers and stuff they were like oh Siobhan do you think you should go to band six first? And I'm like, "No, why would I do that?" Because I feel like I can go to the band seven now. And that's a a nod to us as analysts when we feel we're confident enough we need to step up and do it even if it's kicking the blasted door down. Um so did that interview. Um got offered the band seven role. Um did that for a little bit. Um then I thought you know what data architecture got an opportunity there because you we all sort of have this drive to be a complete analyst. Well I do anyway. So I wanted to get a bit more flavor for that backend type thing because you know sometimes there tends to be like a bit of a standoffish and yeah so you know wanting to understand that moved into data architecture. um did that for a little bit and then boom, here I am. Um head of data visualization at Kent and Medway ICB. Um and loving it. So, so yeah. So, um that's that's a bit of um my career path and and and how I've gotten [clears throat] here. Um James, if you want me to cover anything else? &gt;&gt; Well, Siobhan, you covered quite a lot there. I think you've done [laughter] very well to get all of that into that time. So, we'll pick up a few of those points. I noted here that you uh one of your aspirations is to be a chief analytics officer. So, uh probably next time you come that will be your uh your title. I've also noted in the chat there's a lot of love for the northeast I think which &gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Absolutely. &gt;&gt; Yeah, there we are. Other other regions are available. we should probably say um and to demonstrate our bias we're going to move uh to Rian Davis now who is also I believe sitting in the northeast possibly &gt;&gt; or at least hails [clears throat] from that the world hides out there at least uh and uh Rian is a senior data senior data scientist strategy unit and um it says here in that you have a PhD in statistics and operational research and are a statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical Society. possibly the most difficult thing I've had to read out um at a workshop. But uh over to you now just for your uh your sort of overview really in terms of uh how you got here. &gt;&gt; Sure thing. And yes, I I realize I am about cycling distance from Chevon. So yeah, bu big up the Northeast. Um and I also trip up over the words statistics and statistical which is very challenging when that's your profession. Um yeah so I have a PhD in statistics that's my background um and after my PhD I went straight into sort of data science consultancy in industry so I worked for a number of small startups I worked in uh psychometric mobile phone games I worked in uh a a tiny railway startup with a bloke called Howard uh and then um I worked as a professional um R trainer and consultant for 5 years. So I was mostly in small familysized companies um doing consultancy. That was the thread and and the reason I did that is because uh the reason I like statistics. I like helping people answer their problems. I don't always love much as I love going down a rabbit hole. I find more value spending time with um experts and and people who are really passionate about a very specific interest and then giving them some of the the skills or just helping them unlock the skills themselves to go off and and and answer that question that they really care about. So like a real consultancy mindset which is I think very tied with statistics as well. Um and then when I was working as a sort of professional R trainer and um our our um consultant, I got to do a lot of work with NHS analysts, really real people on the ground working in trusts. I did a lot of training across the UK with different analysts and I was just blown away by um the great work going on across the NHS by individuals. But it just the story was there were individuals sort of fighting all of these tech challenges within their industries and um doing some really good stuff but just it being so spread out everywhere and um that was my sort of first real exposure to NHS work. So I sort of supported the NHS externally for a few years and then I had the chance to join the strategy unit two years ago. Um so this is my first NHS job or or job in public health generally uh health and uh analytics. Um so in a way in terms of like uh I guess challenges I've never worked on the ground in a trust. I've heard a lot about the the pain points um and uh some of the challenges but um it's not something I've ever had to experience. So, I feel quite lucky in that respect that I've had um the opportunity to try and try and help people tackle those. Um and yeah, you mentioned some of the other stuff I do. All of my sort of jobs that I've found so far I've discovered and then had help applying for them through social media and meetups. So, I'm very involved in quite a number of communities. Um the Royal Statistical Society I find really valuable. NHSR well which is now NHS open analytics I was doing before I was an NHS member um uh the R ladies community rainbow r community um and it's through those communities really that I found my people found the skills and actually found those jobs and sort of connected up the paths. Um anything else you think we should chat about now I guess I've not really said anything about the strategy unit but um we've heard a lot about the strategy unit over the last few days. Um, it's nice to be a critical friend, I guess, inside the NHS. That's something I value. I don't know about you, James, that being within the strategy unit. &gt;&gt; Yes, being allowed to challenge is very important, isn't it? I think in in terms of some of the things we do. &gt;&gt; Um, thank you. Thanks for that. We'll pile that for now and we'll come back to some of the the big testing questions are going to fire at all three of you. So, don't worry. You won't be uh you won't be left untouched by it. But, uh, last but by no means least, um, we are pleased to welcome Tom Smith to our panel. And uh Tom is head of activity analysis and forecasting at Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust. Again, another very long business card I think uh Tom for you. And Tom's background, he's going to tell you uh a lot more about this, I think, but uh before I think Tom worked in the NHS, he worked in large scale engineering and manufacturing. Um which means that he's worked in automotive, not trains. So, there could have been a link there with uh Rian, but uh for folks like Toyota and um Rolls-Royce, but aerospace, not um not the Grand Vehicles, I don't think, but uh Tom, it's good to see you on the panel and um over to you for your uh your short story of how you got here. &gt;&gt; Yeah, thank you ever so much. Um yeah, so I'm not sitting in the Northeast. Um I've been on holiday there though, three times. And there's a little fact. It's never rained on any of the three holidays we've we've been in the Northeast. So, um, you know, don't go and work in the Northeast. Come and work in the East Midlands and go on holiday to the Northeast. That's my recommendation. Um, yeah. So, I'm, uh, Tom. I'm head of activity analysis and forecasting at NUH, which, as you say, is a bit of a tongue twister. Um, I have a small but perfectly formed team of um, in sort of two halves. We've got half a team looking at um the activity analysis side of things and we've got half a team looking at sort of quality and nursing. Um so the activity analysis side lean a little bit more towards data science. Um and then the other half of the team look at quality nursing staff um engagement, patient engagement, things like that. So that that's me. Um my job really is to un try to understand this business. It's a big hospital. We're we're um you know a relatively large organization about 18,000 employees two hospital sites and it's a really really complicated business to understand. So my job really is to try to understand it with numbers and then to try to connect up the questions that are being asked and that are um causing trouble with hopefully a skill set and a data set that can move us forwards collectively. So that that's that's sort of my job as it stands today. Um my background is not a a classical analyst background if you like as you say I I my background is manufacturing. So my degree was in mechanical engineering actually. Um so you can say a numerate degree but statistics wasn't my favorite part of that uh course. It's fair to say. Um neither was programming because the programming language we learned was Forran and I hated it and it probably put me off actually for about 15 years. I didn't touch another computer or any code and then gradually slipped back into it with a bit of VBA and then eventually I found R and things have been much better since finding R. Um so yeah background in manufacturing and um what is what is that? So my job in manufacturing was essentially to try to solve problems and um there were lots of different types of problems, some technical problems um but generally in my experience the technical problems tended to just get solved if they were even hard technical problems if they're just technical problems there are a lot of clever people around they just tended to get solved. So my I tended to become involved when it wasn't just a technical problem. It was also perhaps a a cultural problem and a political problem and a problem of will and and a really really sort of naughty uh difficult tricky problem uh to solve in manufacturing. And my formative years as you say were in were in Toyota which is a Japanese manufacturer. Um they have a vehicle assembly plant in Berneston in Derby which is where I worked and um those were hugely formative years in my time. Um, anyone who's worked there would probably agree it's, you know, an incredible privilege to work there. The the Japanese thinking way is incredible. The the the the different way of thinking and breaking down a problem. I'm so so lucky to have experienced it firsthand, even for the short time. Well, wasn't short. It was six or seven years. But, um, it's so so different from anything I've experienced since. And it's I'm incredibly lucky to have done those engineering roles in a Japanese company basically. Um some of the some of I I constantly return to the concepts that that I found there. So waste elimination, the seven wastes, the eight wastes of lean. Um I don't want to bang on about lean because everyone does that. But you know in Japanese culture there are actually three different words for the for the word waste. Um there's there's waste and then there's um the waste of unevenness or variation um you know which is a which is a completely separate concept and then there's a third waste which is the waste of overburden. So they've they've got a really kind of nuanced um approach to a lot of the problems that we struggle with day-to-day. Um and I find myself referring back to it uh really quite frequently actually. Um so yeah that's that's my background. Um some of the proudest things I've done have been in manufacturing sort of again around waste elimination. So I'll give you one little example project we did was um uh deliveries of a certain part were late. It was a gear box. Um and we were the customer and and the supplier that was supplying us this gearbox. It was great quality, but it was constantly late. They couldn't make them fast enough. Um and so we spent about 15 months actually working with the supplier videoing processes. Um and we managed to get from essentially 40 hours of um human contact time building these these parts down to 12 hours. Same quality of end product. Uh very little investment in terms of capital to do that. Um and no extra people obviously because we massively reduced the amount of time it took. Um and everyone was much much happier because it was taking less time to build the the same stuff and and they weren't late anymore. So that was probably one of my my proudest projects and the sort of a little glimpse into the sort of thing you get involved in if you're working in in that type of space. Um but with this as an analytics conference so you know I really do feel like a misfit here but yeah that's the background anyway. Can't hide from it. &gt;&gt; Excellent Tom. Thanks. You don't need to feel like that. I think it's great that we've got people from all kinds of different backgrounds sort of uh giving energy to the to the discipline really which is great to great to see. I was just thinking as you were all talking, as you're all sort of giving your your life story, your this is your life moment if you like. Um I was just wondering how we we'll open out for for questions shortly. So if anyone's got a question they want to pop in the Q&amp;A or in the um chat and please do that. But I was just thinking how important particular people might have been in terms of your journeys in terms of perhaps mentorship or you know some of the kind of cultures you've worked in. Tom you were saying about some of the sort of perhaps Japanese culture has particular you know approaches and particular styles but uh Siobhan I would come to you perhaps in terms of you know particular individuals or mentors or people that you look up to and look back on in terms of you know without their help perhaps they would you know wouldn't have got you to a to a stage. You just want to reflect on some of those things. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um yeah, I've I've I've had mentors um and still do. Um I think mentorship is a really important thing. Um [clears throat] but it it can be quite a tricky thing because in the rare spaces mentor mentee relationships you just kind of it's formed and then a spark the spark flies. Um but 99% of the time you have to actually know that right okay there's value in mentorship um and actually go get it. I think we forget that a lot of times we want to sort of just sit back and we're generally quite quiet as a people you know in data and analytics and we think everything's just going to be spoonfed to us. It's not always like that particularly around the the the personal side. Um so yeah so so I I [clears throat] realized that quite early on um going all the way back to uh when I was doing my first degree um in information systems um and I've always had the sort of flare for um computer science and and those sort of things. So quite early on um not very very early on but my one of my well I would say my second mentor um cuz my first and ultimate would be my mommy um who's left us now um but my second is um my uh what are they called uh department chair at uni um so doing the the information systems degree um they were just introducing an information technology um degree. Um um we had a conversation. I was like, well, should I be changing um cuz I have quite an interest in this, but then still quite keen on the is um and we had a frank conversation. Um you know, he showed um shared his lived experiences. I really learned from that. Um and at times I can be quite a lazy bastard. Um but then in conversation he said right Siobhan you know we came up with a plan on how we can do a bit more courses per semester to actually get the benefits of both degrees. Um so I ended up doing that. Um still got the is but I also got all the course from from the information technology degree. So that was the first flavor for me. Um and along the ways of um moving to the UK um I've I've had mentors um just to say um you know I've had uh both female and male mentors um and mentorship I for me from my personal experience it's not a thing that starts and finishes. So you know as much as I can you know name persons it's about that relationship really. Um, so you know, I've had mentors that shaped me into becoming a data architect. You know, mentors that uh shaped me into um being the first ever analytics and visualization specialist at North Umbrea Healthcare. Um, you know, getting into um the HR department, you know what I mean? So, it's it's it's about just being able to first off know that there's value in it, know that you need to go get it um and put the work in. And then you have to be vulnerable as well. Um because you know what you are is reflected back to you. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Great. Thanks. Uh Ria, let's come to you next in terms of a kind of question about sort of key people or mentors that you've met along the way or you know perhaps uh you found that help and support invaluable. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um so lots of people uh no one clearly is picking out the key thing for me is is community. So the communities I've mentioned earlier actually have getting into those spaces. People I find are very generous with their time and I like to in in my sort of approach to data science always keep uh be helpful as the sort of core you that's why I'm doing my job right. want to try and try and help people and it's something that certainly within well literally our data science team motto is uh kindness worlds domination and um it's really nice to be part of a a kind team um so people are very important um what's I also so I have sought out mentorship formal mentorship and informal um but also despite the fact that I'm junior In my career, I do provide mentoring as well. And I think that's actually quite important. There's a sort of a mindset that you have to be chief analyst or, you know, someone you mentors have to be these these um uh very high formal roles and actually you can mentor um you just have to be a step of the head, a step ahead of the person who just wants a chat. Um so I I get a lot of uh value and and mentorship as such from the people that are actually coming to me for mentorship if that makes sense. Um so yeah I find connections with people and and certainly communities really have been very valuable in my career. &gt;&gt; I think that's really interesting isn't it because it is very much sort of multi-level multi-layer kind of thing. You know you can mentor someone but also you know have a mentor or several mentors at the same time. Um Tom, let's come uh to you, give you an opportunity to to speak to this one because you touched on some of it in in your potted [clears throat] history as it it were, but are there particular um heroes or heroins that you could uh flag as being uh sort of key parts to your your story as it were? &gt;&gt; Definitely. um probably more by osmosis than by sort of a direct sort of formal mentorship agreement. But there are def there have definitely been moments um in my career where where you know literally just snapshots where you're you're in a situation and something happens that that for whatever reason you you hold on to. Um and one of those moments was yes in engineering um you know a really big intractable problem. it. I was the most junior person in a room with my boss at the time and and there were even more senior people from suppliers and from customers and you know it was a really really kind of gnarly situation and everyone everyone had got quite um yeah we it was an expensive meeting because it was a serious problem and um and my boss just cut straight through it all with the question do we do we want to solve this and there was this sort of silence in room and this tumble weed and suddenly his name is Martin and I might even forward this video to him afterwards but um he won't remember that and there was this silence in the room and this tumble weed and you could hear everyone thinking yeah this this should not beat us this is not an unsolvable problem but the way we're approaching it is going to make it unsolvable if we're not careful and and so that's just an I suppose that's just a little example of the sorts of mentorship that I internalize is less formal but but also just to echo as well Ran on the community point there have been points in even in my career within the NHS actually where I've been a little bit sort of lonely and a little bit you know looking for an answer trying to find some some kind of guiding light and for me that guiding light has very much been the analytical community NHSR principally nowadays hacker and all the fantastic people who operate around those those organizations um so community, huge mentorship there. If you log into those forums and don't come away with a good idea every time you log in, um you're not looking hard enough in my view because they're they're absolutely uh cut through with with inspiration. So, yeah, that's my bit. &gt;&gt; Thanks, Tom. That's really positive, really powerful stuff. Um, we've got a question um in the chat from Louise Kllum who says, "What's one thing you'd say to people starting out on their data and analytics career?" So, what's the one thing that you would say other than don't do it maybe is probably the uh standard response to that. But, uh, let's get some thoughts on what advice you might um, you might give. Let's come to uh, Siobhan first. Uh, what advice? Um, got &gt;&gt; you on the spot now, haven't I? See, that's &gt;&gt; absolutely um if we're talking data and analytics um in the NHS, as much as we're feeling a bit at the minute, um I'd still say do it. um because the NHS um is a great organization and no one day is the same. Um if we're talking about just data and analytics in general, I'd say the fact that you're thinking about it means you're already an analyst, so do it. And I love little quotes. Um, and one comes to mind cuz great ships aren't built to stay in the harbor. So once you've had that thought, jump, leave the harbor and take the journey. The waters are going to be rough as is life, but do it because it's really rewarding, you know. And remember, you can pick the technical skills up as you go on, but try to put most of the effort into getting your mindset right. That's where the trick is because and no disrespect to anybody but to myself to whatever I like to say you can teach a pencil to use PowerBI but with the art of questioning not everybody gets that. So so ruminate on those things you know and take the journey and just pick these up as you go on that that would be my my answer to that. &gt;&gt; Great. Thank you. Uh Ria let's come to you. What what would you say to someone starting out their career in data and uh analytics? &gt;&gt; Uh I would say share your work um for a number of reasons. Uh from a personal career growth and profession uh if you share your work, if you put code on GitHub, if you write blogs, write tweets, sorry, tweets are off now. Uh [snorts] other social media is available. um you will be creating an online portfolio, right? In the same way that artists have portfolios, as data professionals, we should have portfolios which share our work. So from a personal development, share your work. Um, but also that process of communicating your work, whether that's putting comments in your scripts or writing tests or writing a readme file for your code or writing a short little blog, communicating your work in any format, giving a talk at a presentation, um, a meetup will make you a better analyst because you have to think about how you communicate that model or that approach to someone who doesn't know as much as you. So by sharing your work, you will be creating a portfolio and you are improving your analyst skills. Um, and it can be very vulnerable. It's really scary putting a script out on GitHub. You feel like people are just going to jump on it and tell you that it's rubbish. Um and actually for me the probably the most of my my coding ability and my endto-end data science ability went up massively when I switched from PhD working individually to writing code with others. That was the way that I learned the best. So feedback from a critical friend will help develop your skills more rapidly than working in a silo. And it's also a good thing to do, right? Open code is is is what we all believe in. So share your work. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thanks, Tom. How about you? What uh what sage advice could you give to the uh the blooding young um data stroke analytics person? &gt;&gt; I'd say do it. I' because there's a lot of interesting work to be done and it's a fantast fantastically broad field. You can find your niche within it. Um, I'd say learn learn to code, get that done. Um, but don't focus on it beyond what is required to do the day job. So, um, choose your language carefully. I'm in a big room here now and I know that no one's going to throw anything at me, but you know, if you've got a choice between learning a proprietary scripting language that your business happens to use and learning an open source language which is used everywhere or in a great many places, do yourself a favor and choose the open approach because you'll find that that that opens doors doesn't close doors in the future for you. Um, but not with notwithstanding that, do not do not focus on the technical. Don't go too far. you you that that will come you you you you won't be able to avoid uh getting drawn into the technical. I'd say the main thing is um understand the business that you're working in, understand the organization that you're working in. Um understand what keeps people awake at night. What does your boss lie in bed at night worrying about? What does what does their boss lie in bed at night worrying about? What does your chief operating officer worry about and your chief exec? and try to sort of align yourself to those problems and bring a little bit of yourself and your skill set into at least partially contributing to uh throwing light on those problems. And I think if you do that with code, it means that you you can you know you can forget about it and then come back to it in a year just as you thought it was safe to completely forget about it. It's still there. You can you can run it and pick the question back up. Um but importantly you you'll be you'll be understanding the business and you'll be relevant. You'll make yourself relevant. Um and from there you you choose any one of a thousand careers inside this this profession. You know you can pick whichever way you want to go because there's so much of it. &gt;&gt; Great. You've all uh you've all gave given a very powerful answer which is uh essentially just do it. And I think that's a phrase we could have used had we not been pipped to the post by a large sports manufacturer, but we could still probably adapt it in some way. So, we'll keep that one on the on the list. Um, we've got another question from uh Sheila Ali who's asked um if there's any advice that the panel can give on breaking through glass ceilings. So uh things that hold us back in terms of uh progressing within organizations particular institutional biases or restraints that might exist. Um let's get some thoughts on that. I'm going to come to uh uh Rian first I think this time on on this one. A glass ceiling. How how do you break through that? &gt;&gt; You could see me thinking I don't know how to answer this question so I'll go straight to her. Um &gt;&gt; yeah well actually Chevon was saying earlier about applying for a job and and wanting band seven and they said go you know do have you thought about band six. Um the first one of the first data science jobs I applied for was a actually a junior data scientist and they wanted someone who had uh they were they you expected to learn R on the job and I applied for it being more advanced than that. But I just it it took a lot of it felt quite weird applying for a job that I was overqualified for just to sort of go in and say look can can you um will you adapt this for me? Um, but that certainly took a bit of courage. Um, yeah, it's it's a question I get asked a lot, especially through my work with things like Our Ladies and and Rainbow R. And um, honestly, I'm still figuring it out. I've definitely had experiences, certainly when I was in the railway industry, of being uh, a young female in the room uh, and no one really listening to what I was saying. Um, despite the fact that I knew the most about that topic. And I think I'm still trying to work out how to do things, but uh when we work it out, Sheila, uh we'll we'll smash it. &gt;&gt; So encouraging. Uh chevron, how about you? What uh what advice might you give? You've touched on a couple of things in terms of, you know, representing and and and standing up against perhaps fairly conservative cultures with a small C. So what what advice might you give for breaking through that ceiling? Yeah. Um, Rian's right. Um, there is no one solution that fits us all. Um, some of us are just going to kick that glass over. Um, some of us are just going to, you know, heat the end and gently [clears throat] shift the glass off and lay it to the floor. Um, some of us are just going to chip away. I think my advice on that starts with first finding your happy. And I think we we often forget that part in everything we do. So you're coming into being an analyst, you're coming into into data and analytics, um you know, you're feeling like you're being pressed on, like you want to grow and all of that in whatever you do, find what makes you happy because then quite honestly, are you breaking the right glass? is breaking that going into that next band, going into that higher role. Is that really where your happiness lies? That's the first thing. Consider that. Get into the habit of reflecting. That's the other thing. Next thing is as data and analytics people, we [laughter] and I I'm guilty of this. We don't put our skills, we don't turn our skills inward. So we'd be asked to look at a million by million data set and we go oh that's flipping tasty and we put all our skills to it but the minute we we go right well the question how do we break that glass ceiling well it's it starts with with self two seconds &gt;&gt; sorry it starts with self [snorts] you know reflecting and knowing where where your happiness is knowing what makes you happy but also what your skills are what what are the reasons you want to break through that glass and is it the right glass ceiling and then when you've answered those questions just freaking do it. Do you know what I mean? It's it's as dead simple as that. Believe in yourself. When I went in sitting at band five going for band seven no like I had no other thing in my head but getting that band seven and you have to believe in self. So as much as you you'll find mentors, you'll find your community, we cannot forget that it's about you, a lot of it is about you and it's your passion and it's your motivation because we all have that strength. I'm kind of preaching now. Sorry, but it's, do you know, you have to sit with yourself and think about those things because we all have it in us. Do you know what I mean? So that would be my my um my my bit on it. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you. Uh Tom, let's come to you because Tom, I you've got a number of perspectives in terms of different industries which I think probably have probably slightly different tinted glass in terms of the ceilings within them. So, uh let's get your thoughts on this one. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think I think everywhere I'm I'm in let's say the middle of my career. Maybe maybe the beginning of the end, maybe the end of the middle. Maybe the middle of the middle. Let's go with that. Um, so I've seen a few organizations now and they're all different, but I think I've seen enough to know that if you're really really struggling with a glass ceiling, it's probably not a place you want to be spending much of your career, don't waste your career minutes, your career hours trying to smash through a glass ceiling. Get your portfolio done like Rianne says. Be out there. And for for every company with a with a glass ceiling, there's a there's a company desperate for your skills that um that you can help and that's going to be much more fulfilling for you and actually collectively sort of globally it's going to be much more progress for the world. You know, you're going to make more with what you've got if you if you're not trying to smash through ceilings. So that's a bit of a scary thing to say as a manager and I I hope if my team are watching this at at any point in the future, you know, hold me to account also, you know, be gentle at the same time because, you know, but but fundamentally, if you're really really struggling with that, you you've always got the option to vote with your feet and to go and get it done somewhere else. And I'd say, yeah, good organizations and good managers don't let glass ceilings happen. Um, so yeah, I might &gt;&gt; give your team a recording for homework, I think, is probably what you need to do there. Make them watch that. &gt;&gt; Uh, thank you. And we're going to move um now to our next sort of question for the panel, which uh is a different type of glass, if you will. This is a bit of crystal ball gazing really in terms of looking at the role of future analyst. And if you can cast your yourself into the future, maybe uh with a Delorean or a Tardis or something like that, I don't know. But uh if you can put yourself in 2035, that would be which uh it's quite frightening, but um 2025 seems a long way away for me a long time ago. But anyway, um this is really about how you think uh your role um in terms of data science and analytics might change in the next 10 years. We know there's a lot of technological development at the moment. there's a big debate in tech culture about um AI and various other things swirling around it. So let's get some perspective and some thoughts perhaps on you know how that role or the role that you're in at the moment might change in the next decade. I mean it's a big question but u we like to take on big questions. So uh let's um I'm going to come to uh Siobhan again I think first for this one because um I like to pick on him first but um crystal ball gazing. It's a difficult one isn't it? But I imagine through some of the things that you talked about and some of the things that you've done, you can see where the sort of trajectory for these, you know, these sort of discipline and these roles might be. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um I think uh [clears throat] particularly for data visualization um and actually probably across analytics overall. Um we don't utilize multid-disiplinary teams enough. um we often set up this um ivory tower type thing. Sometimes we're very sort of guilty of that um in analytics because we get quite pompous and when I say we are genuinely me when I think back on my experiences sitting in the creative industry and now sitting in data and analytics that's what really that was like a perfect marriage for me and that's what really triggered me to go oh damn data visualization. Um but in doing that I've realized that in data visualization it's really more about data and slight visualization rather than actual visualization because there's not much considerations not the way it should be anyway for um the level of communication. So, you know, comes responsibility, branding, you know, being the the the gatekeepers of those, the NHS brand, the organizational brand, using the right colors, um accessibility, neuro die, like those sort of things. We just we talk about it sometimes, but we push that aside because it's about data and analytics. Then we're talking about use um user researchers, we're talking about content developers, we're talking about content designers, we're talking about actual graphic design people. user researchers. We many a times across hack the two days of hacker we've heard people go um oh you need to talk to your stakeholders or you need to go back and talk to your community somebody was asking when do we really engage the community like we're bombarded as it is in data and analytics we don't really have the time to actually go do those things but if we adopted that MDT style then we don't need to bring the resource in we just need to collaborate and there's that C word that collaboration where you go right okay well you're responsible for this and we start connecting those nodes so I think for data visualization and for data and analytics um crystal ball and a massive hope is that we adopt that MDT style where we can have way more collaboration way more nodes connecting up um to that big picture and it helps as well from an organizational and from uh national sort of NHS and whatever institution you're in perspective. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Uh Ran, I saw you nodding through a number of those W. What does your sort of prediction look like for the the future in terms of how these things might evolve and and change? And as you know, we touched there on sort of the multi-disiplinary nature of things, but uh I imag mentioned that you came from a kind of apps background. You mentioned you've been involved in app development things before. So at some point I was thinking Angry Birds was the future, wasn't it? But I wonder what the future Angry Birds might look like. I don't know. &gt;&gt; No idea what the future of Angry Birds is like. But um I was nodding along vigorously because I'm a big fan of MDTs for for data as well. That's definitely uh something I like banging the drum about. Um crystal ball. I'll tell you what's going to be the same, right? A lot of the job is going to be the same which is going to be helping uh curious people who are passionate about something answer questions and having impact that I think is still going to be the same in 10 years. I will say the AI word uh I don't know what's going to change. I have been very AI grumpy the last 5 years or so. Um, my background is statistics and so when people talk about AI, uh, I would unhelpfully roll my eyes, use air quotes, and, um, and, uh, that's that's not helpful. That's not kind. Um, and if I'm grumpy about how AI can uh support some of the work we do, when people seek my advice, then they will go and seek advice from other people, snake oil sales folk who will sell them stuff and do AI to them. So, I don't know what will change in the next 10 years, but I know that I need to be more um I need to be less AI grumpy in order to help people use technology correctly in the next 10 years. &gt;&gt; Interesting. Thank you. Uh Tom, let's get some of your uh crystal ball gazing if uh if we can. Well, I I think 10 years is I think we'll be we'll have a little bit more technology around us. Um we'll be you know AI might might be taking a few hours out of every day uh or letting us do a couple of hours of extra uh or achieving a bit more each day. But I think probably the main thing that's going to change is or what I hope is the case in 10 years is that we're all much better connected. Certainly from an NHS point of view. Um I would hope that within the next 10 years the open-source and kind of open sharing culture has become not just um you know something championed by enthusiastic um folk like of the of the sort that you you probably heard talking in this conference and in others but but it's become mainstream become extend you know expected it's become standard um it's very much hopefully the the normal way of doing business. um certainly in the NHS where we don't have we don't have any commercial pressure to stop us sharing we all are in the same organization with um you know different letterheads but but fundamentally the same organization and there is no there's no sort of systemic reason why we shouldn't share. That's different in the commercial world. You shouldn't share because someone's going to copy your idea and compete with you and and sell it for 10% cheaper. But but here we we should be totally open and sharing. So I I very much hope that the snowball continues to grow and I think it will. So that's my prediction for 10 years. Much more open sharing and and that means when you've got a problem to solve, you'll be a couple of Google queries away from some working code that's been battle tested in some other organization, couple of phone calls away from talking to the people who wrote it in, you know, and maybe a couple of weeks away from having a pilot in your own organization rather than today. It would take very much longer than that to achieve the same thing. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Thanks, Tom. A few folks in the chat echoing the AI grumpiness, however that's um defined. So, uh thanks for that. Uh we're nearly um at the end of our time. We've got about another five minutes, but importantly, we're going to move to another exact uh science from the crystal ball. We're going to move to the magic wand. Uh we use all the tools in the uh in the trade here. Um and uh you're all sort of given an opportunity here ready to sort of tell us about one thing that you could change that would help analysts to have more impact. So you have to visualize a magic wand. I imagine you've got that. What's the one thing that you could change to help analysts have more impact? So uh short and sweet if you can. Um I'll come to uh Siobhan first. the streams there. Interesting one. Um, to help analysts have more impact, I would wave my wand at the managers and the execs and the leaders, not at the analysts. Um, because they can be h walls when not done right. um more than you know self-imposed or self-inflicted um um stuff. So for me it would be getting managers and leaders and exec to realize that us in data and analytics were more than our flipping roles. So we come to work and we bring this awesome skill but I have many other interests and those interests can contribute to making me a better analyst. So that's why I like saying we shouldn't have professional development planning. We should have personal professional development planning [clears throat] where you're not training and developing people to just be this job. So when they're gone can't really do anything else. I mean it doesn't always happen but it would be nice to have some interest that's closely aligned to the job that I'm doing because we need managers and execs and leaders to know that we are more than our jobs. Okay, loud and clear. Thank you. Uh Ran, in um short and sweet if you can. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I'm a big believer in reusability rather than reproducibility. So rather than reproducing analyses, moving to a world where we borrow with pride other analysts code and reuse snippets and develop together across the system. Um, so I'd love to see uh I'd wave my wand and create a national code library of open source public health uh packages that we would all develop together and build on together. &gt;&gt; Excellent. There's a lot of magic power in these wands I'm sensing. Uh Tom, just come to you finally. &gt;&gt; Um I would um magically make everyone want to communicate visually and graphically and with diagrams and pictures. Um so I would love to turn up in the future post wandwaving to meetings where people bring mental models as little flowcharts and concepts and and then during the meeting we can decide you know here's four four different concepts and the meeting can be about turning them into one and coming away with complete agreement or the meeting can be about um here's a much deeper understanding about how those four concepts are different and and at least now we understand where we disagree. Um because I think that's much easier to do graphically. Um and to enable that I would pass a law. Uh no, we don't need to do laws do because we've got magic wands that the very end of the little kind of flick of the wrist would be there would magically be a whiteboard in every single meeting room and it would always have a whiteboard pen that worked next to it. &gt;&gt; Excellent. Getting a clap already. Um we're at the end of our time, but uh just before we sign off, can I just say thanks so much to uh Siobhan, Rian, and Tom for um bravely uh volunteering for this panel, but also sharing um very candidly their stories and helping to give some really creative and imaginative answers as well. Really helpful and um I think you and I'm going to hand back to you now. So because you're steering the conference. So uh thanks everyone.