All right, we've got you now. &gt;&gt; Can you hear me now, David? Is that all right? &gt;&gt; We can all good to go. It's over to you, Neil. &gt;&gt; Okay, great. Uh, yes. So, thanks, uh, thanks for having me. Uh, and really enjoying the conference. Uh, and a big thanks to the strategy unit for putting this on, but also kind of been sort of one of the supporters of this work as well. So I'm kind of struck by what enormously on a shoestring budget what the strategy unit's able to do if you see what I mean. So I think these sort of present enormous value for money for the NHS. Um so yeah I'm I'm Neil Walton. I'm a professor at Durham University Business School. Um I'm a mathematician really by training and I'm kind of a queuing theorist in terms of my research uh specialization. I I'm kind of not completely new to health but you know sort of like three four years into working on health uh data. Um so I'll explain a little bit about that. Um and really what I'll focus on today is um a a a system that we have for sort of tabulating the NHS uh waiting list. What I'll do first of all is because I realize slides are boring and I'm probably boring is that um so if I go to the first slide here, what I'll do is I'll copy over a couple of links uh and you can just play around in the background with the with the with the table. Uh so I'll put that as a link in the chat. Hopefully everyone can see that. Also, there's a the GitHub version on my own GitHub if that sometimes GitHub works for people, sometimes it doesn't. And then also there's a copy of the slides for later if anybody wants them. Okay. Um, just to ask in terms of the chat, can people see access the link that I've just sent over? Also, you can scan this with your phone as well if you want to play around on your phone or your iPad or whatever. Um, do people have access to that? Yeah. Okay. So, yeah. So if I'm boring you with the slides, just have a play around with the table. Okay. Um, good. Thanks. Um, so, uh, yeah. So, so, so what's this about? So, how did this come about? So, there's a little bit of background. Um, so, um, so basically this is the general picture of the NHS um, waiting list. In red here, we see the waiting list size. Basically since about 2011, the waiting list has been increasing till December 2019, at which point it went under a big increase due to COVID, but it was already significantly off target by that point and would have continued to go offtarget. Um, and what we're seeing now is this kind of push to bring the waiting list back in line. Um, and then here you can see sort of the levels when the targets were last made about 3.6 million and the lower end about 2.4 million. uh with the waiting list this size for making targets and then here's some estimates that I'll go into a little bit of detail about what the national rating this size has to be to make targets. Okay, so that's sort of um a little bit of data um on what's going on and what we're looking at. Um and obviously um at government level it's one of the government sort of priorities or missions to get this down to target levels by the end of the next parliament. um which is going to involve removing about a million people off the waiting list every year until 2020 uh was it 2029 is it when the next parliament ends. Okay. So um so basically I worked at the I was at Manchester University and we I worked with the local NHS trust and we developed a series of metrics which are available to managers for understanding their waiting list and I we made a kind of short report on this and there's a link to the paper there and I gave a talk uh to the an Midlands analyst network a couple of years ago and there's a video of that there which just explains basically all the kind of usual mechanics of how a queuing system works, not necessarily for NHS um but just queuing in general, but um I try to phrase it in a way that's more accessible to NHS managers. Okay, so do check out that paper or even better maybe just watch the video. Um so I won't go into all the details of all of that now, but it explains all the kind of main things you should care about in terms of waiting lists. Okay. Um, so, so at that point I kind of left Manchester and kind of wasn't sure what the next steps were this. So that's why I just kind of put it up on Med Archive and kind of left it and it still kind of sits there. Um, but but um, the strategy team were very kind to kind of link me up with their kind of R community. So uh, the NHSR community helped develop this R package called the NHSR waiting uh, NHSR waiting list package. Uh, that's now available on cran. So if you just go on R and do install.packages NHSR waiting list, you can install that on your computer and start trying to analyze your NHS waiting list problems. Um it's still very much a kind of active project that we're still working on, but um we've got um sort of installation, some documentation, some worked examples, explanatory videos and so forth. And so you know uh so if you are kind of an analyst who's used to working with R, then you know this is for you. Um, and we're kind of happy to work with people to try and improve the package and then help it solve your problems better. Um, okay. And, um, so you, you know, the point is to calculate all the statistics that you need, make plans, simulate things, uh, calculate how much capacity you should be giving to your different services. Okay. Right. Um, so that's that's sort of good if you're an analyst who's used to working in R. Um a second spoke um was some calculations that you know we've been doing with the strategy unit and others uh sort of the cabinet office um where we were looking at what the national waiting list size should be in order to make targets. Here's a kind of quick calculation that I'll maybe mention about later uh that calculates that you know the waiting list has to be about half the size. So this is done about um a year ago um this calculation. Um and then a couple of weeks ago you might have we we wrote a paper came out with using sort of slightly more advanced numerical modeling uh on the NHS waiting list and saying it should half in size. Um and depending on which side of the political spectrum you lie on that got into the press a bit. So there's a morning star LBC independent telegraph or spectator. So from right from left to right depending on which you where your political persuasion is you can click on one of the links there and uh and see that that article about that work. Okay. Um, another thing to say, um, is that, um, we with Muhammad Muhammad, who's one of the people who's been helping with the tabulating work, uh, next year in June, June 10th and 11th, we'll have the first national waiting list conference, uh, that's going to be in the welcome trust. And so, um, so aside from all this tabulating stuff, um, there's a conference site link there on the slides and also an abstract link. So if you've been working on waiting lists, um we really want to hear from you. Uh we want people to be involved and contribute to that because it's a big problem in the NHS right now and uh you know it might require some sort of modal shift in the way the system works and so we really want to encourage the conversation around that. Um okay so good. Um so that's all not really about tabulating the NHS waiting list. So let's talk about this national table. Um again uh I'll mention what the motivation is. Um so you know all all the things there are kind of hit at different levels some policy levels some for analysts. Uh but I wanted something that just someone in a hospital trust could just use uh I've noticed that you know so one obviously waiting lists are a big problem everywhere at the moment. Um underlying data is actually published and nationally available but it's not very easy to interrogate and access and use. So the point was just to basically have something where you can essentially slice the data by organization, specialty treatment function uh and then essentially use it to understand your waiting list problems. Um, so you know, even in terms of my own personal usage, um, I'd say like I, you know, I I was taken off the waiting list about two weeks ago or 3 weeks ago myself. Uh, and I actually used the table just to tell which is the local trusts in my area which are going to get me seen quickly as possible and I think I got seen in about four weeks fortunately. I think I was a bit lucky in that but I also was able to interrogate the data a little bit which is publicly available and understand where things are going. Um so but the point is really for people within trusts to be able to use this. Um so to the aim was to build a single table uh a single transparent national table that tabulates all the NHS waiting lists that's public faithful to the published data easy to explore uh reproducible uh but more importantly I think is actually sort of quickly identifying where the bottlenecks and the pressures are within different trusts. Okay. Um so uh that's the aim. Uh again here's the link. Um so um yeah so um I I can I can maybe briefly run through the table over here. Um so let's just get it open. Um so um I I'll I'll just explain what what the table does. So essentially here I've got every provider in in the country, every treatment code. This could probably be done in Excel as well, but I've done it in HTML so it's available more easily available. Uh and different treatment functions. Okay. And then I look at basically what the waiting list size for all of those are. I calculate what the waiting list size should be if it was going to make its 92% 18we target. And then I calculate how far off that waiting list is off its target as as a as a as a multiple. Okay. Uh so these are the the category which I count as the kind of size category. So is your waiting list too big and if so by how much? Uh then there's the shape category which is basically asking is your waiting list a funny a bit and and what you what you typically find is waiting list should be a nice exponential distribution that's should be sort of fairly unavoidable but when people start to introduce sort of special measures and other things it tends to tilt that distribution in strange ways and so this so essentially the percentiles of your waiting list are an indicator of how things are doing relative to that and so we've have this [clears throat] metric which is called the percentile pressure which essentially determines how much pressure is on that list according to its kind of shape. Um okay so that gives the shape things and then the third area that we've organized things into is how much is that uh area improving by. Um so basically how many people have you removed over the course of the last year. So this is this specific table is from May uh last year to May this year. Um what has been the improvement in your weightiness statistic? What is the relative change in the uh the waiting list? What is the percentage change improvement? And more more importantly, I think that the more interesting metric is the load, which is basically what percentage is your service rate, your arrival rate compared to your service rate. So you want your service rate to be bigger than your arrival rate. And so you want this load to be less than one. So anything that's less than one is good. Anything that's bigger than one is bad. Okay. All right. Um so um so let's interrogate this a bit. So um so um so uh would anybody like to focus on a specific specialty? Just write in the chat. I give people one second or we can do a whole provider if we wish. Orthopedics. Okay. [snorts] So I think that should be Yeah. So these are orthopedics. So the code is C1. I'll get this code right. C1 1 Z. Okay. And so and would you like to look at the size or the distribution or the change uh in the in that area. So I'll let anybody go. Size. Peter says size. Okay. Great. Okay. So if we rank it from biggest to smallest, the biggest orthopedic surgery uh biggest orthopedic waiting list in the country is Midsouth Ethics Foundation Trust. Okay. It has 18,000 people waiting in it. It has a Q-siz target if it's going to meet targets of 5,000. Um it is 3.5 times bigger than it should be in order to reach targets. Okay? Right? um that doesn't necessarily mean it's the worst in the country in terms of how it is relative to its size. So if we rank this now according to relative to its size then we find that actually Hillington Hospital NHS foundation trust is the most offtarget relative to its size. Okay. So notice here I can essentially use this to rank every trust in the country according to how it's performing in terms of its size. Okay. I could also filter this down. So some we might want to focus on larger trusts. So if I focus on the largest trusts in the country and then rank that according to it how far off target it is then we find that for example Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Orthopedic Trust is actually has the is the one in the most strife in terms of uh being offtarget. Okay. I could also interrogate uh amongst large trusts which are the most improved. So for example, North Norolk and Norwich University trust uh is the most improved trust. Uh it's moved to sort of its Q size down by sort of 10% is going down by each each year. Okay. So it's very simple um that we just have a series of filters here that you could probably have on an Excel table. uh but it's a way of essentially interrogating across different trusts uh how things are performing in terms of say in this example orthopedics for large trusts in terms of their size or in terms of how they're doing in terms of improvement. Um we could also just look at one trust. So we looked at this nor one here RM1 I I can look at what above they they only focus on orthopedics. Let me try another example. Maybe uh this next one, Royal Surly. Uh so RA2 uh oh RA2 and I'll remove the ah that's one that's let's choose a bigger trust uh D R Y and R. So I can look here across all of the services that this hospital offers and then I can look at the ones that are doing the worst. So in this example for this Sussex hospital TNO is their big bottleneck in terms of size whereas other other policies here if we go down to other services or cardia are actually doing relatively better okay so I can essentially rank all the specialties within that trust and give an objective view on how far how it's weighting this to doing in terms of size other ones we see here like for example neurology service is quite far off in terms of size but it's actually improving at the moment whereas we see the TNO is not so so it gives a way to interrogate all the different lists across the country it's also useful because some some trusts are bigger than others and so it gives a way that I I can sort of you know we've had meetings with some large hospital trusts and they'll say oh well this is offt target because we're a big trust and that's the then you can relativize it relative to other trusts of the same size and say well actually no even relative to other large trust this seems to be a problem area uh whereas other areas which you know uh and so you can start to pick up some of these things and you can also pick up lists which seem to be doing well because they're not too large but then actually in terms of say this uh their distribution or their shape actually a little bit off where they should be as well and so that suggests that some sort of better performance management is needed to improve those lists okay is is that reasonably clear to everybody I can go into more detail there um I'm conscious of time uh uh oh they're for a bit. Um, so so do do stop me. Um, but there are there any other comments. Yeah. Okay. Um, I I've got a bunch of other slides. I won't spend too much time boring you with them. I think I'm kind of out of time in 3 minutes. I'd rather take questions. Um, but the point is to essentially have something that's usable, accessible, easy to play around with. So you know hence you can just click on the web link there that I sent over and just have a play around. Um I explained a little bit about some of the calculations um that might be of use to you. Um in terms of the in terms of this so the just to say the last two things is the the abiding principle of this work or everything we've been trying to do is try to keep things simple and accessible and practical for people. Um the approach to the waiting listing this problem by the strategy union and others is to be try be holistic try as many avenues as we possibly can in the hope that something sticks with people and obviously what sticks with different people depends on their skills specialties positions and all the rest of it. Um I'm particularly grateful to the strategy unit for helping with this. So all of the table will come up will be put on the strategy unit's website so anyone can use it. Uh money is tight but people tend to be generous with their time. So you know many people have been very generous in the analyst community in helping develop some of these works and there's a sort of set of names there that have been very helpful particularly say with the R package and otherwise. So big thanks to all of them. Um the final thing I'd say is do get in touch my emails there um if there's anything you want to see added changed altered if you want us to run this with your data and you think that would be useful for your trust. I haven't done things on priority codes because that's not publicly available, but we could equally do that. So there's lots of things we could do to help interrogate, improve and identify bottlenecks and then hence hopefully improve the situation for waiting list and um through through some of these methods. Okay, thanks so much. &gt;&gt; Thanks Neil. Um we've just got time for for one question. I did want to ask this one. Um the one of the attendees has asked if there are any plans to expand this to include Welsh health boards. Um I mean I'd love to [laughter] we have some a version of the table of this a version of the waiting list work was implemented in Scotland. Uh so there has been a Scottish version of this. Uh I'm not sure how much it got taken up but there there was an analyst to so you know we're happy to work with whoever uh if you if you send me the link to the Welsh data I'm happy to have a have a go at it. um you know so yeah yeah I mean I more than happy to um again like people want to work with me on that just just email me happy to try and get things uh together &gt;&gt; and we've had another question just come in quickly about um how you've accounted for patients being removed from waiting list due to admin or gaming issues rather than actual treatment of the conditions &gt;&gt; I'm just working with the national data from the RT DT thing. So I I leave that to the national team to make sure their data is sufficiently clean. Um all I've tried to do is take what's there, add some statistics which are hopefully more meaningful in terms of identifying bottlenecks and then then remove those. So I haven't done all the data cleaning I'm afraid though um though in principle one would have to do that. Yeah. And when we've done things locally within trust that's something we have to be very careful with obviously. Yeah. people who've been on the waiting list for a thousand years and things like this or strange birth dates and things admission dates and things like that. So, there's all the usual data wrangling and cleaning that needs to happen if you're going to put this within your system. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Thank you, Neil. Well, we're going to have to leave it there, but I'm sure lots of people are playing around with the table in the background and thank you so much for for joining us today. Send me an email if you're interested. Thanks so much. Thanks.